1984.11

Notes on Professor Sylvan's

Critique of the Deep Ecology Movement

Arne Naess

1. Is our living planet alive?

Professor Richard Sylvan has subjected deep ecology to a comprehensive
critique. He seems not quite sure whether it can be improved or should
be discarded. In any case, he will work on a "deep-green theory" partly
in agreement, partly opposed to deep ecology. After studying three
successive versions of his critique[1] it seems to me quite clear that
his further work on the suggested deep green theory will give more
interesting results for all parties concerned than continued discussion
of what he identifies as 'deep ecology'.

Professor Sylvan deplores the biocentrism of deep ecology, and refers
(in part) to point one in the about 300-word presentation of a set of
"principles" or basic points the deep ecology movement worked out by
George Sessions and myself. The first point reads as follows (in one of
its versions):

(1) The flourishing of human and non-human life on Earth has value in
itself (synonymous: intrinsic value, inherent value).

From this sentence Sylvan seems to infer that deep ecology holds that
nothing other than living organisms on Earth has intrinsic value. Deep
green theory on the other hand holds that many non-living things in the
terminology of biology may have intrinsic value. And why limit intrinsic
value to what is on Earth? Why exclude the possibility of intrinsic
value on other planets?

Unnecessary to say, here I completely side with deep green theory as
pictured by Sylvan, and 'deep ecology', as conceived by him, I find
simply stupid. But I ask myself how he can infer what he does from (1).
If a is a member of class C, it cannot be inferred that there is no b, b
being different from a, which also is a member of C. If (1) started with
the phrase "Only the flourishing..." the situation would be different.
One of my problems may then be stated as follows: "What makes Sylvan
choose an interpretation that makes the proposed first principle
strangely incompatible with explicit deep ecology pronouncements that a
river system may have intrinsic value? Or wilderness?" The principles of
deep ecology as formulated by Sessions-Naess in Ecosophilosophy VI does
not intend to be centered on biological organisms, but may be said to be
life-centered in a wide sense.[2]

It is tempting to answer that because (according to Sylvan) deep ecology
in fact contains so much "rubbish" (see pp.1, 29, 47, etc.), one may use
a rule of interpretation like the following: If there is a choice
between an interpretation T₁ which makes a sentence closer to the status
of rubbishness than another, T₂, then T₁ is more likely than T₂ to cover
the intention of the deep ecology author. While I do not think Sylvan
follows this rule, it is in part because we have different empirical
testable beliefs, and this sometimes makes it difficult for him to find
non-rubbish interpretations.

2.Slogans and Empirical Semantics

A quotation from p.16-17 of his Critique will, I hope, make clearer what
I mean:

Many of the natural items revered by deep ecologists are not alive:
Mountains, waterfalls, wild rivers, sunsets, and so on. Naess and
Sessions try to escape this difficulty flowing from their biocentric
restriction of intrinsic value to life, by stretching the term 'life'
beyond its ordinary and biological use to include favoured natural
objects that are not alive:

The term "life" is used here in a more comprehensive non-technical way
to refer to what biologists (and also dictionaries) classify as
"non-living"; rivers (watersheds), landscapes, ecosystems. For
supporters of deep ecology, slogans such as "Let the river live"
illustrate this broader usage so common in most cultures.

The complex use of the verb and the adjective "live" and the noun "life"
cannot be adequately covered in a dictionary. But good ones of course
take notice of non-biological ones. (In Oxford Dictionary we may find
quotations such as "The world is to live for thou".) As to the use of
the powerful slogan "let the river live", scarcely one in a thousand who
used or commented on it had any trouble with the use of "live" referring
to non-biological items. The life of the river included much more than
the life of any set of organisms in the river system and adjacent
landscapes. This is my empirically confirmable hypothesis. My second
hypothesis is that in so far as usages are classifiable into ordinary
and non-ordinary, the usage exemplified in "let the river live" is
ordinary. Sylvan probably reasons on the basis of very different
empirical hypotheses.

Frankly, I think that as professional philosophers with a lot of
analytical training, we are apt to underestimate the richness of
ordinary (non-professional) language - and also its philosophical and
mythological 'innocence'. The continuation of the above quotation will
give me an opportunity to clarify what I mean by this 'innocence':

Of course the metaphor is intelligible, as is 'Let the river run free'
(and there is a different literal use of 'live river' and 'dead river').
But a convincing theory had better not be built only on metaphorical
assignment of value to inanimate things or by appeal to dubious or
discredited mythologies of other cultures to which natural things are
(considered) alive. For one thing, this looks too like the
anthropocentrism that biocentricism is supposed to be a major leap
beyond; and indeed many of the mythologies that bring out the river as
alive are of this anthropocentric type. The river is alive because of
the river god or river nymphs, or like (nonexistent) projections of
humans. Presumably then - and this should show much of what is wrong
with the 'life' extension - an analogous stretch of the term 'human' can
be justified by appeal to other cultures: 'The term 'human' is used here
... to refer also to what deep ecologists classify as non-humans: bears,
wolves, mountains,...'.

The distinction between literal and metaphorical uses of a word is
sometimes convenient, but the appointment of one definite interpretation
as being "literal", for instance, a current scientific one, is from the
point of view of an empirically oriented theory of communication mostly
unfounded. The use of "living" and related words referring not only to
creatures described in the biological sciences may have a cognitively
adequate meaning. In the famous case of "let the river live", "the
river" referred to a vast ecosystem which even comprised parts of a
non-industrial human culture. The semi-nomadic Lapps were considered
part of the ecosystem and Lapps tended to say that the river was 'part
of themselves'. Hydroelectric developments on a vast scale ruptured the
system and decreased the diversity and richness of life and violated the
ethics of intercultural relations.

3.Status of Mythology

But what if some of the protectors of a river-system using the above
slogan were believers in river gods and river nymphs, and were confirmed
in their beliefs through the slogan? I guess many, even most supporters
of the deep ecology movement would not mind. I would certainly not have
recommended a change of the slogan. The status of mythology and, more
generally, of verbal articulations within non-industrial cultures, is
today a very different one from what it was, say in the 30s, and many of
us applaud the change.

In the 60s and historically not unrelated to the upsurge of the
ecological movement, social and cultural anthropo-social and cultural
anthropology changed face. Implicitly the point of view had previously
been dominant, that non-industrial society would and should progress
towards the industrial state and the scientific world view. Widened and
deepened communication with non-industrial cultures and study of their
history added to the impact of the change of perspective.[3]

Why is "Space-time tells matter how to move, matter tells space-time how
to curve" scarcely classed as mythology in any derogative sense, nor as
rubbish? Because there are reformulations which only a tiny fraction of
the population understands properly but which are supposed to be highly
scientific. Mythology of ecological import cannot be reformulated in the
same way but sane ecological decisions are often derived from it within
non-industrial cultures.

Some of the "rubbish" which Passmore and Sylvan find in deep ecology
literature attests to the influence of recent cultural anthropology and
to the influence which shorter or longer stays in non-industrial
cultures have had upon many of us. It affects our language, not as
researchers, but in direct expressions of attitudes and feelings.

One of the aspects which impresses us most is the ecological functions
of many myths, rituals and 'strange' customs. The attempts to
'translate' the myths into scientifically respectable language are
well-meaning, but often inadequate.

4.Bacteria and Viruses

But back to the question of biocentricity! The point of view that all
organisms of which biology speaks, and only such organisms, have
intrinsic value is presumably a very rare view and has no special
connection with deep ecology.

The status of each of the proliferating kinds of known microorganisms is
an open question. The intuition I speak about and which has to do with
clear and forceful identification is presumably absent except among
people who are active in research.[4]

A significant minority of people answering questions about "rights of
animals and plants" have trouble with bacteria and viruses. Are the
questions meant to cover them? Those who think they are tend to support
the view that they have rights and are of intrinsic value in their
capacity as forms of life.

An arctic landscape may superficially look rather dead in winter. In
spring it may look overwhelmingly alive. It would take long training to
force perception to distinguish organism from non-organisms in such a
live landscape. Even in winter the lover of the landscape sees abundance
of individual life forms and also higher order gestalts.

Why is the gestalt ontology not mentioned in the platform formulation? A
landscape with organisms - and all landscapes have organisms in
micro-organisms are counted - is a high order, natural gestalt. The
separation of organisms and non-organisms is very unnatural in gestalt
thinking and apperception. But the concepts of gestalt-thinking are too
special for platform formulations. Only a minority of supporters of deep
ecology are academics.

5.Platform formulations and philosophies

The above brings me to a crucial feature of my conception of the deep
ecology movement: The four levels illustrated on p.4 in Ecophilosophy VI
and in many other places.

The project of a deep green theory is a project in philosophy. This is
perhaps the reason why the critique of deep ecology including the
platform formulations by Sylvan often is formulated as if what is to be
considered are two rival theories. Only level 1 contains philosophies
(including metaphysics, of course) - and explicit religious foundations.
There is not, and hopefully will never be, any significant common
characteristics on level 1. The cleaning up of "rubbish" on this level
is a hazardous undertaking from my point of view.

If an author introduces a slogan and also a non-slogan 'precization' of
what he means by it, discussion must take into account the more precise
formulation. Sylvan argues against Commoner's slogan "Nature knows best"
that because nature is not a creature with intentions, it cannot
significantly know anything. Presumably "nature knows something" is then
taken as an instance of philosophical rubbish that must be fought. But
Commoner adds sentences of non-slogan nature:

Stated boldly, the third law of ecology holds that any major man-made
change in a natural system is likely to be detrimental to that system.
This is a rather extreme claim; nevertheless I believe it has a good
deal of merit if understood in a properly defined context.[5]

As critical philosophers we must look for the least rhetorical or
poetical sentences of our colleagues who are participating in social
movements, not the most. But even the non-slogan sentence quoted from
Commoner I would not accept as an isolatable theorem in a
systematization of an environmental philosophy. The value term
'detrimental' needs a definition - to mention one weakness. I have
called the sentence a 'maxim' in "A Defence of the Deep Ecology
Movement", Environmental Ethics 4, 1984, p.268. It is a very good maxim
with a rhetorical function (due to the undefined use of "detrimental")
in addition to the plain descriptive function. Now (April 1985) I think
my expression "typical maxim of the movement" (p.268) overemphasizes the
rhetorical function. Sorry.

In a comprehensive philosophy of level 1, for instance in an 'ecosophy'
in my terminology, every key term of the platform formulation (level 2),
would have to be commented upon and elucidated. This may be seen as a
'clearing up' operation. A higher level of preciseness is achieved and
elimination of philosophically unsuitable rhetorics. In such a
philosophy, not at level 2, belongs a term like gestalt. And what about
the term 'value in itself'? In order to find out a little about its
usefulness or lack of usefulness outside academic circles, I inserted in
a questionnaire about animal rights (etc.) a question whether people had
heard about it and understood it. Most of them seemed to understand, but
had not heard the term used. I mention this because of the important
empirical hypotheses presumed solved when decisions on terminology are
made. When empirical studies are lacking and several terms seem about
equally well suited, it is for some of us difficult to make exactly the
same choice through many years. Sylvan takes notics of some of my
changes in terminology which are apt to confuse.

6.Values which are not valued

Some 'experts' and some people answering questionnaires on rights of
animals and plants are clearly critical of something having 'value in
itself'. The point of view that all valuations are human valuations, and
maintains that a value must be value for some kind of living being. Such
a philosophical view I do not think can be or should be ruled out as
contrary to deep ecology principles. It implies that the interpretation
of the term 'value in itself', if the term is not eliminated from the
platform formulations, must be compatible with the view that value must
be value for some kind of living being. Actually such interpretations
are rather common. Children, for instance, are considered to be valuable
in themselves, but the valuation is taken to be relative to actually
existing or imagined living beings. If only small children were left on
the planet for a day they would not lose their value in themselves that
day. Most people asked seem to think that the same unchanged status
holds for living beings in general. Even without actually existing
valuers they have value in themselves. (Such as after a nuclear exchange
leaving non-vertebrate organisms.)

The above is discussed because a set of platform formulations should be
vague and ambiguous enough to be capable of rather different
philosophically relevant interpretations.

7.Hermeneutics of platform formulations and of philosophies

The principles of interpretation of platforms of movements resemble
those of interpretation of laws. Vagueness is here essential primarily
because those applying the laws must have some freedom in adapting them
to ever changing circumstances, but also because the formulations must
slur over, or abstract from minor differences of relevant opinion among
those who have supported the issue of the law. On the other hand, the
interpretation of the text of a philosopher resembles that of a
testament ('will'). Exactly what the testator intends is the sole
criterion of correctness of the interpretation. Whether his or her
terminology is abhorent or crazy is irrelevant.

The questions of interpretation arise when we analyse the following
quotation from Sylvan (pp.47-48):

The theme of cosmic identity, often included in the deep ecology
package, generates much further rubbish. According to this theme, which
identifies person with planet or even cosmos, you and I are identical
with other natural objects, up to and including the universe. The theme,
like any number of outrageous principles, has worthwhile applications.
Since I am the forest, the destruction of the forest is the destruction
of me; so, as a matter of self-interest, I resist the destruction.
Unfortunately, the theme also has bizarre consequences. Since I am the
forest, I cover several acres and comprise many mossy trees, but cannot
significantly have, as I do have, a face or feet. Since you and I are
one with the planet, and you thin and I fat, you are both fat and thin,
old and young. And so on. There are ways out of this mess, but the way
of extreme holism, which would obliterate you and I as separate persons,
simply makes things much worse.

The 'mystical' experience of unity (unio mystica) reveals certain rather
special processes of identification. There is in the literature on
nature-mysticism much to learn. Fritz Staal and others may be consulted
on the general study of mysticism. But the rubbish cleaners are not very
impressed!

"The question what we are to make of reports of mystical experience is,
of course, a large one, not lightly to be settled. One thing is obvious:
whenever the mystics - 'spiritual' or 'bodily' - make claims which can
be empirically tested, they are false. Angela of Foligno tells us that
she was lifted up so that she could see all the countries of the world;
it follows that in her mystical vision the world was flat. Had we asked
her to describe then-undiscovered Australia it is not a mere guess that
she could not have done so accurately. If, similarly, a drug-taker tells
us that, now he has taken LSD, he 'feels like Einstein' it will
certainly be pointless to expect from him some new contribution to the
unified field theory."

"Science does enlarge men's consciousness..."[6]

8.Identification

By the expression "the deep ecology package" Sylvan probably refers to
level 1 of the movement, the religious and philosophical foundations
from which the platform-views are 'derived' in a loose sense of the
word. Sentences of the kind 'A identifies with B' (for instance 'Jones
identifies with his organization') are open to many interpretations. 'A
is strictly (including spatial) identical with B' or 'A and B are only
arithmetically different' scarcely ever covers the intention. This kind
of interpretation is also ruled out in relation to the metaphysical and
religious sentences which are said to imply a process of identification.
If A identifies with B they are more than arithmetically different.[7]

9.Deep cultural differences preclude deep mutual understanding

If we read a sentence of metaphysical or religious text and find that
for every interpretation we can imagine the author intended, the
sentence is rubbish or nonsense, there are (among others) two rather
different conclusions available: 'What the sentence is intended to
express is rubbish' and 'I cannot imagine what the sentence is intended
to express'. Reading or listening to religious or metaphysical
derivations of basic deep ecology views like those listed by Sessions
and me, it is for me a rather common experience not to be able to
imagine exactly what may be intended by a sentence - for instance one
written in Heidegger's terminology. But why take this as a kind of
desirable thing, it must include differences of philosophical and
religious kind which are beyond comprehension by any single
investigator. (The usual 'surveys' of philosophies I take to be
superficial. Even to compare Descartes, Spinoza and Leibniz as to their
concepts of substance is unlikely to succeed if we ask for a common
framework within which we can talk about all three. This has to do with
the depth of premises discussed.[8]

In short, when people try to articulate their fundamental beliefs of
philosophical or religious nature, it cannot be expected that we get any
clear picture of what they all mean. Sometimes their 'definiteness of
intention' may be low, sometimes high, but we do not have any
methodology to decide the issue.

It is common among activists in the environmental movements to talk as
if they believe what they often call 'technocrats' have a significantly
different philosophy than they themselves. 'Shallow ecologists' (a
dubious term) are sometimes said to be utilitarians in a narrow and
disreputable sense. I think this is highly misleading; therefore I have
started writing to key persons among 'experts', preferably such as would
be used by administrators and governments to elicit their reaction to
the formulations of the deep ecology platform. Answers confirm my
suspicion that there is no systematic difference from supporters of deep
ecology. The reaction to all the 8 points of the Sessions-Naess platform
are largely positive, and when philosophical issues are discussed, there
is no tendency to accept any narrow utilitarianism.[9] But what I think
is lacking is a justification of their function of at least indirectly
to support present unecological policies. Using the 4-level
illustration, what to me seems weak in their total view is the
connection of their general fundamental views (level 1) and their basic
ecological views (level 2) with their views on current unecological
policies (levels 3 and 4). These are practically unanimously deplored by
the 'experts' but (in Norway) they tend to consider it politically
impossible to get ecologically sane policies adopted because people will
not vote for them.

"A shallow utilitarian may, as we have seen, match Naess step by step,
in his working back through ecosophy to the fundamental value principle.
That shows the flaw in the idea of especial depth in ecosophic thinking;
for the derivation doesn't make such a utilitarian deep."

What Routley here says is acceptable. What I have not said clearly and
consistently enough is that I do not believe in the existence of people
who (at four levels) justify present unecological policies from any
philosophy, utilitarian or otherwise, significantly different from those
of supporters of the deep ecology movement.

Some people whose views are not those of shallow ecology defend
particularly atrocious cases of pollution because the bad effects are
crystal clear and therefore affect the opinion of people fast - and time
is short! It is better to get easily seen very bad ecological situations
soon, than avoiding such situations for a long time until non-reversible
much more serious conditions arise. Disapperance of woods in West
Germany is considered a 'good' thing for this point of view. It is
easily seen and it positively affects European public opinion on
ecological issues in general. (But the point of view is too cynical in
my opinion!)

In any case I think it is more effective to presume that a supporter of
present day unecological policies has philosophical or religious views
compatible with a deep ecological platform, than to presume they reason
from incompatible basic premises. The next best to do is to presume that
the supporter has no philosophical or religious views. In fact it is
difficult to get supporters publicly to argue from basic positions.

In my experience it is on level 1 or 2 there is not much to be done, but
rather in connecting those levels with actual political issues. (Levels
3 and 4).

10.Self-realization

In particular presentations of a particular philosophy from which the
Sessions-Naess platform is derived, namely 'Ecosophy T', I use a model
where 'Self-realization!' and similar short formulations are taken to
express a top norm of a normative system. This seemingly pretentious
undertaking lends itself to misunderstandings. I shall therefore add
some words to previous explanations.

Practically every researcher today makes use of models. But the
methodology of models is not very well known. A model is, roughly
speaking, a highly simplified representation of a complicated subject
matter which facilitates invention and testing of new hypotheses about
the subject-matter.

"Suppose acid rain is caused by factors A, B and C, what will be the
effects of policy P? But we have enough information to know that even if
A, B and C are the main factors, there are many others. "Of course",
says the model constructor. "But the model is worthless if we insert
more factors into it."

A completely articulated total view is a fiction, perhaps even
nonsensical from a logical point of view. But we may articulate 'models'
of a very comprehensive normative system, and use it to explore the
interrelations of our own views and those of others. I have extensively
used a model of a comprehensive view I call 'Ecosophy T' and I use only
one top norm which on the crudest semantical level is expressed by a
one-word sentence 'Self-realization!'.

A main inspiration for the choice comes from the use of the term by
Gandhi.[10] It is (of course) not chosen in opposition to the Buddhist
non-self-doctrine (anatmavada). The 'Self' in 'Self-realization!' is not
a god-like entity somehow hidden behind the appearances. The Buddhist
anatmavada is chiefly pointed against just entities.

Another main inspiration is the strong trend in Western industrial
states towards an individualism favoring life as a long ego-trip full of
'happenings'. In France there is a group of 'egologists', the name being
chosen as a contrast to 'ecologists': whatever the relations between
individual beings, human nature is such that the egocentred interests of
each of us are stronger than any other. To foster the kinds of
solidarity the political left is talking about, or the solidarity with
other life forms which ecologists (the Greens) preach, will therefore
never succeed and is apt to hurt the individual.

'Self-realization!' is a norm that initially arouses interest among
those who are influenced by the ego-trip trend, but are then astonished
and bewildered by the distinctions between ego, self and Self. This is
new to most of them and they are often led to reconsider their
individualist position. This reconsidering is for me a confirmation of
the Socratic value of the choice of formulation.

The main point in this connection is that humans undergo a maturing
process, and only if this process comes to a 'premature' halt,
identification with others and solidarity fails to develop. If we, as I
do, add the Spinozist (courageous) hypothesis that the joy and
eqimindedness you experience as a mature person is deeper and richer
than that you experience as an immature grownup, 'realization of the
(wide) Self!' gets to be an instructive and inspiring formula.

But others will be inspired by other formulas, and the important
complexities purposefully behind ignored by any simply models of a
comprehensive normative system, make the elaboration of models of
limited value. The Self-realization norm I proposed has been taken too
seriously[11] as if my one-, two- or three-word expressions were
adequate philosophical expressions of a 'highest' norm. An adequate
expression implies that the intricate subject 'ego, self, Self', that
is, biological, social and metaphysical self are distinguished. Only in
relation to a fairly large body of philosophical analysis can be
formulate adequate philosophical principles. It has always been that
way.

11.Both Pluralism and Dogmatism?

It is easy to point to weaknesses and imperfection in the deep ecology
literature - of course including my own. But I connot see that there is
a 'dogmatism' which rules out pluralism on all levels, especially
level 1. Critics tend both to impute very definite philosophical or
religious views to the movement and regret the wilderness of different,
in part incompatible views of every kind. Not only Sylvan but also
Richard Watson furnishes examples. The latter says after scarcely one
page of presentation of the movement that the "ideal, then, seems to be
some sort of subsistence farming with a technology powered only by men
and animals, wind and water, and wood fires, that is, no fossil fuels
such as coal and oil giving rise to industrial technology would be
allowed."[12] This is indeed a very special kind of utopia. Perhaps some
deep ecology supporters entertain such ideas, but I doubt it. In a sense
both Richard Sylvan and Richard Watson overrate the deep ecology
movement: they think its supporters have answers (however bad) to
practically all questions.

[1]     ^(?)The latest version of April 1985 is A Critique of Deep
Ecology, No.12 of the series Discussion Papers, Philosophy Department,
The Australian National University.

[2]     ^(?)The life-centeredness does not imply ethically positive
valuation of everything happening in the biosphere, for instance,
everything happening in the world of sensitive creatures. Even less does
it imply what Richard Watson says: "... the first principle, that life
has value in itself, seems to be a specification of the principle that
whatever is, is good or right" (p.6, op.cit.) Spinoza's distinction
between Natura and universum is useful to keep us from false romanticism
concerning 'the law of the jungle' (Gandhi).

[3]     ^(?)

[4]     ^(?)

[5]     ^(?)Barry Commoner, The Closing Circle, 1972, p.41.

[6]     ^(?)J.Passmore, The Perfectibility of Man, London: Duckworth,
1972, p.254.

[7]     ^(?)More about the process in Naess "Identification as a Source
of Deep Ecological Attitudes", in M.Tobias (ed.) Deep Ecology, Avant
Books, 1985. Sir Alfred Ayer answered me in a way characteristic of a
high level British tradition in our television debate when I uttered "I
think I believe in the ultimate unity of all living beings". (Fons
Elders (ed.), Reflexive Water, Souvenir Press, 1974, p.29 et seq.) Fritz
Staal's The Study of Mysticism, I find useful perhaps because he has a
sort of analytical and empirical training which I have (and also
Sylvan).

[8]     ^(?)Background literature for the kind of concept of 'depth'
used here: R.G.Collingwood, Essay on Metaphyics, Oxford 1940 'every
sequence of questions rests ultimately on presuppositions that are not
answers to questions', and Naess, "Reflections about total views" in
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 25, pp.15-26. - For those who
harbor antimetaphysical feelings I recommend David Rynin "Donagan on
Collingwood: Absolute Presuppositions, Truth and Metaphysics", Review of
Metaphysics, 18, 1964, pp.301-333.

[9]     ^(?)Materials only available in Scandinavian languages.

[10]     ^(?)Naess, Gandhi and Group Conflict, Oslo 1974.

[11]     ^(?)This holds of the discussion of my Self-realization
formulas in GullvDg,I. and Jon Wetlesen (eds.), In Sceptical Wonder.
Inquiries into the Philosophy of Arne Naess, Oslo University Press,
1982, pp.250, 286.

[12]     ^(?)Whole Earth Review, March 1985, p.6.
