1984.12

Intuition, intrinsic value and deep ecology

Comments on an article by Warwick Fox[1]

Arne Naess

1. Which are the basic intuitions of deep ecology? How are we to
verbalize them? How can we use them as guiding stars when formulating
our policies? How can we avoid pseudo-agreements and
pseudo-disagreements caused by incompatible verbal idiosyncrasies?

These are questions on the metalevel with the deep ecology movement on
the object-level. The movement is not mainly one of professional
philosophers and other academic specialists, but of a large public in
many countries and cultures. As an academic philosopher, I find the
questions important, but as a supporter of the movement I do not
consider them central. We may discuss them in a relaxed way, noting
richness of somewhat divergent and even incompatible answers with
equanimity.

The following are some reflections elicited by the excellent article of
Warwick Fox dealing with some of those questions.[2] I coined the terms
'deep' and 'shallow' ecology movement, but I do not course try to
monopolize those terms. And I only welcome some diversity of
verbalization of basic attitudes and intuitions. I hope the following
does not sound dogmatic.

2. Fox quotes Godfrey-Smith who says that "deep ecology... has an
unfortunate tendency to discuss everything at once. Thus a social
critique of deep ecology may be backed by such disparate authorities as
Ginsberg, Castenada, Thoreau, Spinoza, Buddhist visionaries, and Taoist
physics. With a cast of prima donnas like this on stage it gets very
hard to follow the script." (Fox, p.1) In order to facilitate discussion
it may be helpful to distinguish a common platform of deep ecology from
the fundamental features of philosophies and religions from which that
platform is derived, if the platform is formulated as a set of norms and
hypotheses (factual assumptions). The fundamentals, if verbalized, are
Buddhist, Taoist, Christian or of other religious colors, or philosophic
with affinities to basic views of Spinoza, Whitehead, Heidegger or
others. The fundamentals are mutually more or less incompatible or at
least difficult to compare in terms of cognitive contents. The
incompatibility does not affect the deep ecology platform adversely.

The common platform within the deep ecology movement is grounded in
religion or philosophy. In a loose sense it may be said to be derived
from the fundamentals. Because these are different the situation only
reminds us that a set of very similar or even identical conclusions may
be drawn from divergent premises. The platform is the same, the
fundamental premises differ.

In order to clarify the discussion one must avoid looking for one
definite philosophy or religion among the supporters of the deep ecology
movement. Fortunately, there is a rich manifold of fundamental views
compatible with the deep ecology platform. Furthermore, there is a
manifold of kinds of consequences derived from that platform.

The discussion has four levels to take into account: verbalized
fundamental philosophical and religious ideas and intuitions, the deep
ecological platform, the more or less general consequences derived from
the platform - lifestyles and general policies of every kind. Lastly,
descriptions of concrete situations and decisions made in them.

From the point of view of derivation one may use the following diagram,
the direction of derivation proceeding down the page:

In this figure, B, P, and C are not made largely overlapping chiefly
because of the difficulties of formulating agreements and disagreements
in relation to texts written in religious language.

It is a characteristic feature of deep ecology literature that it
contains positive reference to a formidable number of authors belonging
to different traditions and cultures.[3] These references are not made
in order to trace complete agreements but primarily to make tentative
suggestions of deep similarities of views. Spinoza, only to mention one
single great author, obviously entertained some opinions far removed
from those of deep ecology. And his terminology is practically
impenetrable for us today. Nevertheless, his texts are inexhaustible
sources of inspiration for some deep ecology theorists.

Some may find it strange that I include Christian fundamental views. But
Christian supporters of deep ecology belong to the most active groups,
for instance, in Scandinavia. I do not think one can speak of any
definite value theory common to contemporary Christian thinkers.[4]
(Cp.Fox, pp.12-13).

3. Warwick Fox seem to think that different behavior towards different
kinds of living beings is difficult to justify without acknowledging
different degrees of intrinsic value to different kinds of "organisms".
But I accept certain established ways of justifying different norms
dealing with different kinds of living beings. They do not necessitate
grading that a particular intrinsic value living beings have simply as
living beings. There is an attitude I cannot avoid, perhaps an intuition
of some sort, which make me proclaim that value to be ungraded. But to
proclaim the existence of that value does not logically or otherwise
necessitate a norm of equal behavior towards all living beings. There is
room for vast differences. There is no pressure to introduce grading of
the particular intrinsic value I am speaking about. Such grading does
not fit the attitude and intention at hand.

Some intrinsic values may be graded. The value Warwick Fox speaks about
may be graded. We probably do not speak about the same intrinsic value.

A personal testimony:

I have injured thousands of the little arctic plant salix herbacea
during nine years of accumulative stay in the mountains, and I shall
continue to step on them as long as I live. But I have never felt the
need to justify such behavior by thinking that they have less right to
live and blossom, or less intrinsic value as living beings, than certain
other living beings, including myself. It is simply not possible to live
in certain mountains without stepping on these plants, and I maintain
that it is justifiable to live there. When I behave as I do I can at the
same time admire these plants, acknowledge their equal right to live and
blossom with my right. At least not less and not more. Perhaps it is a
better formulation to say that living beings have a right, or an
intrinsic or inherent value, or value in themselves, that is the same
for all of them. In so far as we speak of differences in value we do not
speak of the value I have in mind.

What I now have done is to try to verbalize one rather deep intuition.
But any such verbalization may mislead the verbalizer, and they
certainly very often mislead the listeners or readers. There are other
intuitions and there are thousands of differences of attitude reflecting
differences of valuation. If there is a question whether to place my
foot on a salix herbacea rather than on the small overwhelmingly
beautiful and somewhat less common gentiana nivalis, I certainly,
obviously and deliberately, place it on the former.

The abstract term 'biosperhical eqalitarianism in principle' and certain
similar terms which I have used, do perhaps more harm than good. They
suggest a positive doctrine, and that is too much. The importance of the
intuition is rather its capacity to counteract, the perhaps only
momentary, but consequential self-contratulatory and lordly attitude
towards what seems less developed, less complex, less miraculous.

There is a rich variety of acceptable motives for being more reluctant
to injure or kill a living being of kind A than a being of kind B. The
cultural setting is different for each being in each culture and there
are few general norms, only vague guidelines.[5] One factor: felt
nearness. It determines largely our capacity to identify ourselves with
a sort of being, to suffer when they suffer. One cannot put forth
ethical rules of conduct without taking such feelings and ur limited
capacities seriously. If it is difficult to avoid killing A because of
its smallness, whereas killing B is easily avoided, we tend to protect B
rather than A. There is an obvious diversity of obligations. We have
special obligations towards our our children in most cultures - any
animal may be killed in order to feed one's starving child. Obligations
towards species that have been members of our life community for long
periods are greater than toward accidental visitors. Furthermore, we
have the relevance of suffering: is the suffering of A less than that of
B? Has A the capacity of suffering?

The simple thing I try to convey here is that an ethics concerning
differences between non-human living beings is of a comparable level of
complexity of ethics concerning different people and groups with whom we
have to do.

4. I prefer the term "living being" to the term "organism". The
intuitive concepts of life sometimes cover a stream, a landscape, a
wilderness, a mountain, an arctic "waste". The intuition has not much to
do with biology or neurophysiology as sciences. Intrinsic value as
posited by the intuition is influenced, but not decisively so, by
"biological news", for instance news about whales' "comparable nervous
system complexity to humans" (Fox, p.13).

The kind of intuition I speak about I tke as being common to supporters
of the deep ecology movement. It is not easy to verify this, however,
because of terminologica or even conceptual divergences.

[1] Published in Ecologist, 14, No.5-6, 1984, pp.201-203

[2] I refer to the mimeographed version of Warwick Fox, "The Intuition
of Deep Ecology".

[3] Cp. the 70-page review by George Sessions in R.C.Schultz &
I.D.Hughes (eds.), Ecological Consciousness, University Press of
America, 1981.

[4] The kind of trend in value theory I feel at home with when speaking
about intrinsic values and intuitions is that of Max Scheler and
Nicholai Hartmann. Cp.Max Scheler, Der Formalismus in der Ethik und dei
materiale Wertethik, 1913-1916, The Nature of Sympathy, Translated in
1954. - Nicolai Hartmann, Ethik 1926. - Christian theologicians within
the deep ecology movement include: Ole Jensen, Caught in the Violence of
Economic Growth, Kbh. 1976, Gunnar Breivik, "Society in Equilibrium - a
Theological Valuation", in H.Olsen, ed., Toward a Society in
Equilibrium, 1978, a work edited by Nordic Protestant Churches. (Titles
are translated into English).

[5] More about the relevance of tradition and culture in my
"Self-realization in Mixed Communities of Humans, Bears, Sheep and
Wolves", Inquiry 22, 1979, pp.231-241.
