1984H

Experts and Deep Ecology[1]

Arne Naess

In industrial states private and governmental environmental policies are
largely justified by referring only to what hired ‘experts’ say in their
official reports. When the environmental impact of a river dam is
assessed by hired archeologists, botanists, climatologists, these are
asked certain carefully selected questions and in publications by the
agency paying the experts, only answers to those questions are
mentioned.

On the whole, argumentation are bound to be one-sided and shallow,
because questions are of that character. One-sidedness results, however
from many factors: Those who pay choose those experts whom they expect
will give answers best suited to justify the policy they wish to, or
already have decided to, carry out. Experts who are known to say more
than they are asked to say are largely avoided. The kind of questions
asked does not comprise certain relevant kinds if these are ‘dangerous’.
Sometimes only economists and experts on tourism are asked because a
piece of interference with the environment is on the whole mainly
considered to have short-range, narrow economic interest. Furthermore,
the political pronouncements describing the answers may neglect to
inform readers about the exact wording of the questions posed. An
example: Economists were asked by the government as how to secure
economic growth in arctic Norway. The conclusions were published in a
form which suggested that the experts were asked a much wider question,
namely how to promote progress and growth in that region. The aim of the
government seemed to be to justify their economic growth policy, a
policy with vast, largely unknown social and ecological consequences. By
use of the misleading title, the government could pretend that experts
identified progress and growth with purely economic growth (at any
social and ecological cost).

Because of the kind of questions put and the one-sided choice of
experts, the public tend to think that experts on the whole favor the
policies their governments and other big institutions and organizations
adopt. The seriousness of this situation is increased due to the
widespread idea that a question asked is such that the expertise, that
is, the experts’ knowledge and competence, covers exactly that question.
This is mostly not the case, especially when the question concerns
environmental impact. An example: Ecologists are asked by the Department
of Environment or by the oil industry to assess the impact of oil spills
on the plankton of the North Sea. The question is a very general one,
the area of the North Sea being very big. And the ecologists must of
course interpret the question to concern short and long range
consequences of oil spills of various sizes. Ecologists engaged in
research on the consequences complain that they have not had enough
resources and time to answer in a way that they consider ‘scientific’.
They have been pressed to give answers covered by their expertise. The
answers are conjectures.

The general public get the impression that the experts do not think
consequences of oil spills are very serious. And they retain their idea
that this soothing opinion is a scientific conclusion based on adequate
research.

The situation is the same in thousands of cases: Experts make ‘expert
guesses’, these are inadequately reported, and the public tend to retain
their illusion.

But the situation can be made to change, and there are many supporters
of deep ecology who are in a position to contribute, however modestly,
to a change.

A first premise for action is the following:

Among experts - and now I am talking about so-called experts in general,
not only those directly concerned with environmental policy - there are
many, probably thousands - who are a kind of supporters of deep ecology
without taking pains to inform the public about this. Their
argumentations are sometimes deep, but rarely or never in public.
However, their indirect support is often considerable - by donations,
subscriptions, encouragements to people taking part in direct action,
and in many other ways.

In short, much would be gained if they more often and more of them
publicly admit that they are supporters of the deep ecology movement.

- Which are the causes and motives of the public silence among experts
who are supporters of deep ecology in private?

Here are some suggestions:

1. Time taken away from profession work.

2. Consequent adverse effect of this on promotion and status.

3. Feeling of insufficient competence, outside ‘expertise’.

4. Lack of training in repeating basic opinions in understandable
language. (If they had said

something once, they are reluctant to repeat it.)

5. Lack of training in use of mass media and in facing non-academic
crowds.

6. Negative attitude towards expressing ‘subjective’ opinions,
evalutations, violating norms of

‘objectivity’. Reluctance to enter controversial issues.

7. Negative attitude of fellow-researchers, institute personel or
administrations. Decrease of

status in the scientific community. Complaint of colleagues or bosses
that there is a dabbling

in irrelevant, controversial fields, but going public is due to
vainglory, publicity seeking.

Complaint that what is said in public is unscientific. Resulting low
status in the scientific

community.

8. Belief (sometimes well founded) that a public proclamation of support
of deep ecology

would be counterproductive: some experts with power to modify policies
in deep ecology

direction would lose that power if they made clear how they feel.

What can be done to counteract the tendency to public silence among the
experts who are in sympathy with deep ecology?

1. Find them.

2. Listen to explanations why they are silent.

3. Find out whether they in principle are willing to expose themselves
publicly. If they are,

4. Help find suitable occasions on which they can enter public
discussion or

5. Suggest themes of articles they can write or how they might add
certain paragraphs to what

they are writing.

(We presuppose that they as experts touch upon the problem of relevance
to deep ecology).

6. Propose that they talk to their colleagues about deep ecology, that
deep ecology is discussed

at a professional meeting.

Clearly not all supporters of deep ecology have contact with experts who
are in a position to influence the situation, but those who have, can
contribute to a change of the politically crucial relations between the
general public, experts, and those who pay for expertise.

[1] A lecture given at Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, October
1984.
