1984.5

Deep Ecology and Lifestyle[1]

Arne Naess

There is a great number of definite, more or less easily definable
tendencies and attitudes which show themselves in the way people live. I
am now focusing on the differences of lifestyles within an economic and
social framework which the individual cannot be expected to change.
Supporters of the deep ecology movement may be expected to at least try
to live in harmony with what they accept as ecologically relevant
guidelines, and to admit more or less inevitable lapses. One should of
course not look for 'complete consistency', whatever that would mean. It
would be practically impossible to formu-late precise criteria for a
consistent deep ecology lifestyle. Every formulation would have to be
vague and highly dependent upon terminological idiosyncrasies.

It is agreed that it is important to clarify ecological consciousness
and how it is revealed in action.

I have found it fruitful sometimes simply to list ten-dencies and
attitudes characteristic of supporters of the deep ecology movement,
focusing on Scandinavia, and freely enjoying my own terminological
specialities. The order here adopted is not intended to reveal
differences of importance, nor does it worry me that most items are
overlapping. More worrisome is the methodology: I lean heavily on
personal observation.

(1) Use of simple means. Avoidance of unnecessarily complicated means in
order to reach a goal or end.

(2) Propensity to prefer activities which most directly serve values
which are considered intrinsic. Avoidance of activities which are merely
auxiliary, havng no intrinsic value, or being many stages away from
fundamental goals. Hand over to the flea-markets what can be used but
one does not use.

(3) Anti-consumerism. (This negative attitude follows from (1) and (2).)
Reducing personal property.

(4) Endeavor to maintain and increase the sensitivity and appreciation
of goods of which there is enough for all to enjoy.

(5) Absence or low degree of novophili - the love of what is new merely
because it is new. Cherishing old and well-worn things.

(6) Efforts to dwell in situations of intrinsic value and to act rather
than being busy.

(7) Appreciation of ethnic and cultural differences among people, not
feeling them as threats.

(8) Concern about the situation of the Third and Fourth Worlds and
attempt to avoid a standard of living too much differ- ent from and
higher than the needy. (Global solidarity of lifestyle).

(9) Appreciation of lifestyles which are universalizable, which are not
blatantly impossible to sustain without injustice toward fellow humans
or other species.

(10)To go for depth and richness of experience rather than intensity.

(11)To appreciate and choose, when possible, meaningful work rather than
just making a living.

(12)To lead a complex, not a complicated life, trying to realize as many
aspects of positive experiences as

possible within each time-interval.

(13)Cultivating life in community (Gemeinschaft) rather than in society
(Gesellschaft).

(14)Appreciation of, or participation in, primary production - small
scale agriculture, forestry, fishing.

(15)Effort to satisfy vital needs rather than desires. Resisting urge to
'go shopping' as a diversion or therapy. Reducing the sheer number of
possessions, favoring the old, much worn but essentially well-kept
things.

(16)Attempts to live in nature rather than just visiting beautiful
places, avoidance of tourism (but occasionally making use of tourist
facilities.)

(17)When in vulnerable nature, living 'light and traceless'.

(18)Tendency to appreciate all life-forms rather than merely those
considered beautiful, remarkable or narrowly useful.

(19)Never use life-forms merely as means. Remain conscious of their
intrinsic value and dignity even when using them as resources.

(20)When there is a conflict between interests of dogs and cats (and
other pet animals) and wild species, a tendency to protect the latter.

(21)Effort to protect local ecosystems, not only individual life-forms,
feeling one's own community as part of eco- systems.

(22)Not only to deplore the excessive interference in nature as
unnecessary, unreasonable and disrespectful, but to condemn it as
insolent, atrocious, outrageous and criminal - without condemning the
people responsible for the inter- ference.

(23)Try to act resolutely and without cowardice in conflicts, but to
remain non-violent in words and deeds.

(24)Take part in or support non-violent direct action when other ways of
action fail.

(25)Vegetarianism, total or partial.

There are many publicly available sources for the study of deep ecology
lifestyles, such as naturalists' and alter-native lifestyle periodicals.
In Norway the periodicals published by The Future in Our Hands deal
extensively with problems of youth seeking to form new lifestyle circles
of friends. Perhaps more important is the direct contact with people
during direct actions.

In recent years the practical possibilities of a highly developed deep
ecological lifestyle have been reduced in Europe by economic policies
that ruin small scale enterprises. There is also a dominant tendency to
standardize and regulate education and conditions of work. In short, the
structuring of society is more detailed, leaving less room for
subcultural independence. On the other hand the reaction against this
trend is strong. It would have a greater impact if those who support the
deep ecology movement were more active politically. There seems to be a
26% tendency, however, to find politics boring or distasteful.

In the 70s, when the movement was new and exciting, there was a tendency
to be dogmatic: one should use bicycles, one should not travel by air.
Bears ought under no circumstances be shot. Hunting, even for ecological
reasons, should be limited. One should not visit non-industrial cultures
because it would tend to weaken them. One should avoid every sport
requiring mechanical means. Agriculture ought to be biody-namic; no
poisons should be used. Etc etc. There is today more wisdom, less rigid
rules. And the old Indian prayer is taken more seriously: "Great Spirit,
grant that I may not criticize my neighbor unless I have walked a mile
in his moccasins".

[1] First published in The Paradox of Environmentalism, Neil Evernden
ed., York University, Faculty of Environmental Studies, June 1984,
pp.57-59. Slightly revised September 1993.
