1985F

Gestalt thinking and Buddhism

Arne Naess

1. Impermanence

2. Anatmavada and Self-realization

3. Everything may become Buddha

4. Selves are processes

5. Transcending subject/object dualism

6. Things in themselves and values in themselves.

7 'All things have value'

1.Impermanence

In the oldest forms of Buddhism monks were reluctant to answer
metaphysical questions. And if answers were offered, they were expressed
undogmatically. 'Take it or leave it'. Even if true, a philosophical
opinion might be of meager help, or even a hindrance on the eightfold
path.

Permanence, even eternal being, is asserted of substance (Descartes,
Spinoza) and of some other kinds of metaphysical entities beyond or
behind 'appearance'. Gestalt ontology con-siders these entities to be
entia rationis, abstract con-structions worked out by reason to
facilitate its work.

The concrete structure may have a lower or higher degree of permanence.
The structure of an ecosystem may show notable change during a century
or practically none. It may show a short or long 'life time' in the
sense this term is used in theory of radioactivity. Abstract structures
are timeless, but reason uses them for a short or long time.

The concrete contents of reality are shifting. Discon-tinuity and
universal impermanence characterize the world of gestalts.[1] Perhaps
not quite in the sense of Buddhism, but in a closely related sense.

2.Anatmavada and Self-realization

The 'doctrine of no (permanent) Self' is essential both in Buddhism and
gestalt thinking.

In my outline of a philosophy (Ecosophy T) 'Self-reali-zation!' is the
logically (derivationally) supreme norm, but it is not an eternal or
permanent Self that is postulated. When the formulation is made more
precise it is seen that the Self in question is a symbol of
identification with an abso-lute maximum range of beings. Selves are
frequently recurring items, or knots, in the structure of contents. But
they have not the concreteness of contents! Ego, self and Self are entia
rationis.[2] The same applies to a term like 'self-realization'. But
this status as instruments for thinking does not exclude such terms from
appearing in important statements. "Only through one's self-realization
one can attain nirvana...", says Abe Masao in his article concerning
Dogen's term Buddha nature (buddhata).

3.Everything may become Buddha

"Grass, tree, nations and lands, all without exception

attain Buddhahood". This is supposed to be a motto in the Japanese
Tendai tradition.[3] Tentatively I take "all without exception" to refer
to gestalts, not any fragments or relata in abstract structures. Thus,
it is not asserted that a tree defined solely by its primary or
"objective" qualities may attain Buddhahood, but gestalts involving the
tree with all qualities and being semi-permanent through recurring
traits.

There is of course a variety of interpretations of 'be-coming the
Buddha', but some are closely related to the con-cepts of
Self-realization through identification.

The Buddhist compassion extended to all beings, implies 'seeing oneself
in all things', a process of identification. Without this things appear
foreign, devoid of life, and im-possible as objects of compassion. If I
have understood Abe correctly, Dogen's concern for elimination of the
process of generation and extinction is central. The identification of
humans with animals, plants and other natural objects rests on a common
basic cosmic characteristic: Generation and extinc-tion.

There is a question of how wide range of beings may be said meaningfully
to realize themselves. Animals: Yes. Plants: Yes. But a wider range
dilutes further the very concept of realization and Self. There is a
limit here. Not a definite, and the options where to trace it are many.

The similarity to certain forms of mahayana consists primarily in the
tendency to widen the range of 'becoming Buddha' or 'realize the Self'
beyond what common sense in our culture seems to be able to digest. The
meaningfulness of everythng becoming Buddha is in part dependent upon
the disappearance in (certain forms of) mahayana of distinct things.
This leads us to the difficult problem of how to interpret the Buddhist
anatmavada, the negation of the existence of Selves.

4.Selves as processes

The use of personal pronouns and all other forms of language referring
to individuals and groups of individuals are used freely and in standard
way in fundamental Buddhist texts. Examples:

1."Monks, do you not speak that which is known by yourselves,

seen by yourselves, found by yourselves?"

"Yes, sir!"

"Good, monks! You, monks, have been instructed by me through

this timeless doctrine which can be realized and verified,

leads to the goal, and can be understood individually by the

intelligent." (Majjhima Nikaya, I, 265.)

2.Engineers lead water,

fletchers make arrows,

carpenters form the wood,

wise men master themselves. (Dhammapada, verse 80).

In the sentence "wise men master themselves" the word atta, Sanskrit
atman is used. There is, in this passage and in others, no hesitation in
proclaiming that wise man (pandita) have selves. The selves are tamed or
mastered (damayanti), but not destroyed.

The famous sentences in the Diamond Sutra must, as I interpret the text,
be understood in a way that does not at all make the use of personal
pronouns and terms like self suspicious or even illegitimate.

The individual selves are processes or aspects of processes, always
changing, but showing an important, limited continuity and permanence.

The words of Samyutta Nikaya, I, 135, are instructive:

Why do you then harp on the word 'person'? Mara, you are starting from
wrong premises. This is nothing but a lot of processes; no 'person' is
found here. For just as the word 'carriage' is used when the parts are
combined, so the word 'person' is commonly used when the factors are
present.

One may, as in this translation (due to R.E.A.Johansson[4]) render the
word satta with "person", but a more general term may also be used. What
seems to be said is that there exists no entities which do not have the
character of processes.

To 'realize oneself' as I use the word corresponds to some degree to the
Buddhist expression 'to follow the path'. Each must follow his or her
own path, because of difference of experience (cp. quotation 1 from
Majjhima Nikaya), but the different paths, if followed far enough, lead
to states that have something in common.

The ultimate goal is in Buddhism indicated by the term 'nirvana'.
However interpreted, nirvana cannot be understood in terms of Hindu
metaphysics. The idea of a universal, abso-lute atman is foreign to
Buddhism. As I use the expression, 'realizing the Great Self', it does
not correspond to a Hindu idea of realizing the absolute atman. If I
should choose a Sanskrit word for 'self-realization' I might select
'realizing svamarga', 'realizing one's own way'. The 'Great Self'
corres-ponds to the maximum deepening and extending of the sva[5]
through the deepening and extending of the process of identi-fication.
Anyhow, the Great Self is an entitia rationis, not a concrete content or
the set of all concrete contents, if such a concept could be defined
without paradoxes.

In downplaying the status of ego's and autonomous selves, there is
little left of the foundation of any sharp distinc-tion between
anything. The warning not to take individually too seriously or
literally is forcefully expressed in the Diamond Sutra:

"Subhuti, what do you think? Let no one say the Tathagata cherishes the
idea: I must liberate all living beings. Allow no such thought, Subhuti.
Wherefore? Because in reality there are no living beings to be liberated
by the Tathagata. If there were living beings for the Tathagata to
liberate, he would partake in the idea of selfhood, personality entity,
and separate individuality."

Nor shoud the special wording of this passage be taken literally. The
idea of liberation has validity. Only one must not absolutize the
distinctions and believe in substantial existence.[6]

5.Transcending subject/object dualism

The belief and acceptance that all whole beings can attain Buddhahood
depends upon the rejection of subject/object dualism. That is, one must
get rid of the feeling that there is always and always must be an ego
involved in experience. Appeal to spontaneity, perhaps especially
spontaneous ex-perience in nature, is favorable to a detached view of
the subject/object relations.

Verbally the non-dualism in Buddhism is sometimes expressed by saying
that all beings are one, or that each being is one with all other
beings. Such a formula must not be taken in the counter-intuitive sense
that, for instance, I cannot be cold and hungry and somebody else warm
and sat-isfied. The formula does not imply rejection of personal
pronouns or any psychology of the ego and self.

It is an interesting problem how to formulate clearly the views which
have rejectiion of subject/object dualism as a common characteristic.
Whatever the way we formulate the non-dualism, we tend to feel as
adherents of deep ecology sympathy with views expressed, for instance,
like this by Yasuaki Nara:

"... in Dogen, through the negation of the egocentric

self, whole being, including man, animal, mountains, rivers, grasses,
trees etc., is one with him, making both nature and himself encompassed
within the world of the Buddha." (Op.cit., p.2).

Referring to a poem by the poet So-to-ba, "in which the sound of the
mountain river revealed reality and the poet had satori in listening to
it", Dogen emphasizes the oneness of So-to-ba and the sound of the river
by asking whether it was So-to-ba whohad satori or the river." (Op.ct.,
p.4).

As I see it, a happening refers to a whole constellation or gestalt of
relations. 'Satori!' might well be an expression of a kind of happening.
In that case, it is not evident that one should be able to sort out a
subject 'having' Satori, or an object eliciting the satori and revealing
reality to the subject. The satori as a content is one, and only an
analysis of abstract structure leads to definite conceptions of parts of
the whole.

The words of Buddhaghosa can be used in proclaiming the reality of
gestalts rather than subjects and objects:

For suffering is but no sufferer,

not the doer but certainly the deed is found

peace is but not the appeased one,

the way is but the walker is not found.

(Visuddhimagga XVI 90)

The term suffering (dukkham) may be a good name for a class of gestalts.
Each member of the class has a structure comprising subject, object and
a medium. The term sufferer (dukkhita) suggests a narrower connotation,
pointing merely to a subject who suffers. Similar reflections may be
made con-cerning the other pairs of opposites in the quoted text.

The indefiniteness and plurality of conceptual analysis is clearly
indicated in what Yasuaki Nara says about another poem, one by Matsuo
Basho:

Old pond

A frog jumps in

The sound of water

"Here Basho and surroundings are interfused; Basho, the frog, and the
pond are one world and the one who jumps into the water may be a frog or
Basho himself; the sound is of the water or of the frog or even of
Basho." (Op.cit., p.5).

The poem is from the point of view of gestalt thinking a high level
expression of a concrete content. Conceptual ana-lysis may split it up.
But it has gestalt status, and the splitting will be more or less
arbitrary. This applies even to the subject/object distinction. It may
or may not apply as a significant abstract structure attributable to the
gestalt.

Western historians of world literature tend to make conceptual analysis
stressing the internal life of the mind. A Zen Buddhist poem 'about' the
branches of a tree might in this tradition be explained as follows: 'The
poem tells about the sadness expressed by these branches, but in reality
the poem expresses the sadness of the poet. The poetical style requires
a projection of personal states of consciousness into objects of the
external world'. This way of analysis makes Zen poetry and ontology into
a subclass of Western poetry and ontology. Yasuaki Nara proposes a not
essentially different translation which he adds to the above analysis:

"This poem is not a mere description of the scene com-municating the
quiet atmosphere but the expression of the poet himself, absorbed in the
quietude". (Op.cit., p.5).

Nara resorts, in explaining the poem, to the distinction between the
poet and the scene, a distinction similar to that between man and
environment in the shallow ecology movement.

What the Both-answer can do in these matters is to post-pone, or hold
back, the introduction of the subject/object distinction by admitting a
diversity and richness of onto-logically homogeneous traits (rather than
'properties') of a constellation. Primary, secondary and tertiary traits
are completely on par.

The secondary and tertiary are not in need of a subject, a mind, a
consciousness in the form of a container with subjective ponds, frogs,
trees and water inside it. The concepts of things in themsevles are held
back because we do not find contradiction between dissimilar utterances
about 'the same thing'. ('Things with properties' are described in terms
of 'fields' - comparable to what happens in physics.)

The Both-answer has of course a rather limited function, the same holds
good of the notion of 'concrete content' as contrasted with 'abstract
structure'. But as starting points of reflection about 'things' they
liberate us from certain prejudices.

6. Things in themselves and values in themselves. 'All things have
value'

There are some complications worth mentioning at this juncture.

One must distinguish subject/object dualism and sub- ject/object
distinctions in general. The term 'dualism' is used when the distinction
is said to be fundamental, absolute and pervasive. Dualism is accepted
in the theory of duplication and in the theory that things in themselves
do not have qualities. Everythng we experience has such qualities.
Rejec-ting them means establishing duplicate things inside the mind.

The outstanding dualist of Western philosophy is René Descartes. Much of
contemporary efforts to avoid the paradoxes and counter intuitive
consequences of dualism are conceived in terms of anti-Cartesianism. It
is not by sheer coincidence that Descartes also is the main proponent of
the view that animals are insensitive machines and nature has value only
as a resource for humans. But I shall not try to explore connections
between dualism and these historically significant views.

The insistence that there is nothing, no substance, 'behind' the
concrete contents corresponds to the Buddhist conception of sarvam
tathatvam, "all is such as it is". But the conception of a world of
concrete contents and fields rather than things in themselves, may seem
to undermine our concern for individual beings - animals and plants, and
for

abstract entities such as species. This need not be so. Spon-taneous
experience is not the same as sense-experiences. It is experience of
more or less stable things and processes of 'the world we live in'
(Lebenselt in the terminology of philoso-phical phenomenology). When we
see an orange we see a thing, not a patch of yellow or orange or
greenish color. When meeting an animal, we meet in our spontaneous
experience something enduring and self-propelled. The essential aspect
of the ontology of contents is not a negation of enduring beings, but of
the omnipresence of the 'we' or 'I' and the duplication in ex-ternal and
internal worlds.

These words are meant to introduce our comments to Yasuaki Nara's
interpretation of the Japanese notion inochi (life). He thinks it
gradually got to refer to the intrinsic value of all beings. "Gradually,
the Buddhist precept of non-killing has come to be understood not only
as not taking life of animals, but also not taking inochi of all things.
Sometimes it has further been said that not-killing is to let inochi
live." (Op.cit., p.7).

The notion of intrinsic value as some kind of life in a broad sense has
important consequences. The movement of deep ecology is in some
countries closely allied to life styles in part characterized by careful
and respectful handling of things more or less in general, not only of
sentient beings, not only of living things in the sense of organisms.
There is a remorse for taking their inochi.

The Japanese custom of kuyo (memorial service) must be mentioned here.

On a day sometime in Autumn, eel-dealers, restaurant manangers and some
ordinary people representing the general customers gather together to
have a religious service. A small altar is constructed and one or more
priests chant Buddhist sutras to the eels who were killed and eaten by
us to nourish our lives. The Japanese do not exactly believe in the
existence of a soul of an eel. The implication of the ceremony lies
rather in the complex feelings of remorse for taking their lives and
inochi, of thanks, and of soothing their souls, if any... In the Edo
period, the housewife and daughters of each home were supposed to do
kuyo for the used or broken needles with a sense of regret for their
lost inochi, thanks, and also with prayers for the enhancement of their
sewing talents. Since the Meiji period, the needle-kuyo has come to be
observed by some temples or Shinto shrines collectively annually on
February 18. ...

Some medical doctors and nurses sometimes join, bringing the needles
used for injections, Kuyo is also done for old clocks, dolls,
chopsticks, spectacles, tea-whisk, etc. To sum up, the tra-ditional view
of nature in Japan first of all do not make clear distinction between
man, animals, and things. Though the individuality of each exists, all
are felt to be part of the one world of the Buddha, each revealing its
value. (Op.cit., pp.9-10).

This horizontality and anti-hierarchical way of feeling things is gained
by using the notion of concrete centents as a starting point. Or, to be
more precise: The kind of philosophy I think comes nearest to truth and
which I feel at home with supports this kind of horizontality, and the
notion of concrete contents facilitates its formulation.

Considering some of the most cruel parasites, inflicting slow painful
death on their victims, it is difficult to invest them with any sort of
intrinsic positive value. That applies even more to chemical and other
weapons. But they certainly are 'things' and therefore seem to be
eligible for kuyo.

In short: What about the 'problem of evil' in relation to the conception
of intrinsic value of all things? Clearly the conception is as
vulnerable as any other which tries to attach uniform positive value of
some kind of all that is felt to be real (sattva). There is a need for
clarfication of the mean-ing of the intrinsic value conception, but I
cannot go into the matter here.

The inochi and kuyo phenomena are primarily cultural in a general sense,
not philosophical. But they furnish irrepla-ceable and invaluable raw
material for philosophical re-flection. In many Western countries
environmental struggle involves direct actions and violent
confrontation. The norms of non-violent group conflict as worked out by
Gandhi and others do not only exclude violence against the opponents,
but also against their machinery and other equipment which from a direct
causal point of view destroys life and life conditions on a vast scale.
The norms against so-called sabotage invol-ving such equipment are based
on deep attitudes which express themselves in cultural phenomena like
inochi and kuyo.[7]

[1]     ^(?)I follow gestalt terminology in my "The World of Concrete
Contents", Inquiry 28, 1985, pp.417-428 and Ecology, Community and
Lifestyle, Cambridge University Press, 1989.

[2]     ^(?)Cp. the following, called by Suzuki "ground-principles of
the philosophy of Mahayana Buddhism, and, indeed, of all the schools of
Buddhism":

"(1) All is momentary (sarvam ksanikam)

(2) All is empty (cunyam)

(3) All is without self (anatmam)

(4) All is such as it is (tathatvam)

D.T.Suzuki, Outlines of Mahayana Buddhism, 1963, page 140.

[3]     ^(?)Yasuaki Nara, "The Practical Value of Dogen's view of
Nature", mimeo., p.1.

[4]     ^(?)Cf. his excellent Pali Buddhist texts. Explained to the
Beginner, Scandinavian Institute of Asian Studies Monograph Series
No.14, Lund 1973, p.35.

[5]     ^(?)In the oblique cases sva is used as a reflexive pronoun,
synonymously with atman.

[6]     ^(?)Therefore I think the comment by D.G.Merzel (The Ten
Directions, 3, 1982, No.1, p.1) might be misleading:

"This teaching of the illusory nature of the ego is the core of
Buddhism, and the Diamond Sutra is one of its most profound expressions.
According to this sutra even the idea of liberating all beings must not
be cherished because in reality there is not one to be saved. If we
think, "I must help this person", we are seeing things dualistically. We
are operating out of the idea that there is a self, an "I", that is
doing the saving, and one that is going to be saved."

In this quotation, Merzel uses freely the word "we": "If we think... we
are seeing... We are operating...", To me this use of the personal
pronoun is neither more nor less meta-physically relevant than the use
of the word "I" in saying "I must help this person".

[7]     ^(?)Not being a Buddhist scholar (or even amateur!) I have not
found the above note worthy of publication. A letter from Robert Aitken
has, however, given me some encouragement:

2119 Kaloa Way

Honolulu Hawaii

96822 USA

December 18, 1983

Dear Arne,

Please pardon this long delay in responding to your interesting paper. I
was preoccupied in November with com-pleting revisions in my book on
Buddhist ethics. There were complications too involved for me to go into
here; the upshot was that my mail just stacked up unanswered. Pleace
accept my apologies.

I think it is an excellent, very worthwhile paper. I checked a few
typos, and in addition, please note that Pro-fessor Abe often writes his
name with surname first: Abe Masao (not Masai). Masao Abe would be the
conventional way to render his name in a Western language. Note that the
name Dogen takes a macron, as does Tathagata. I didn't mark each
instance.

About the word satori: this usually refers to an ex-perience, but
sometimes it refers to a state or condition. It implies something
complete, and in view of the ongoing process of realization after
realization, Zen masters generally don't use it, preferring the word
kensho, which means "seeing into (true) nature", and by usage implies a
glimpse. D.T.Suzuki used satori a lot, so that practice is copied by
others. I wonder if references to inochi and kuyo should include their
ordinary translations, "life" and "memorial service".

Looking now at pages 13 and 14, I think that Professor Abe's statement,
"Only through one's self-realization can one attain nirvana", refers to
a personal grasp of the fact that all things are empty, and also of the
fact that nirvana and samsara are the same. I don't think that it
reflects any con-cern by Dogen that the process of generation and
extinction be eliminated. The Mahayana view that all beings are
enlightened from the beginningless beginning makes process a matter of
realizing what has always been true.

That's all the comment I can make on this most interesting paper. I
return it to you with my warm best wishes for a happy and peaceful New
Year for you and your family.

Yours sincerely,

Robert Aitken
