1986.6

Deep Ecology in good conceptual health[1]

Arne Naess

I

The Editor of The Trumpeter has asked me to discuss Professor Henryk
Skolimowski’s article "In Defense of Eco-Philosophy and of Intrinsic
Values". Its positive message, as I understand it, is such as may be
expected from a supporter of the deep ecology movement, but who is
troubled by the rich flora of philosophical articulations of it. Perhaps
he expects that there will be one winner and the others recognized as
weeds. I hope this will not happen. But I recognize the value of
clarifications. What I say in what follows is based on my own
philosophical attempt at articulation. It is of course only one attempt
among many - I am glad to add.

II

Skolimowski’s article opens as follows:

  Deep ecology is in a deep conceptual trouble. It has hardly formulated
  itself as a coherent body of ideas, and it is already split apart by
  its incompatible interpretations. During the last couple of years its
  chief exponents have been shifting grounds attempting to formulate in
  ever new ways the central message of deep ecology. So far there have
  been at least four candidates:

  1. the principle of anti-anthropocentrism (this proved untenable);

  2. the principle of radical egalitarianism (this proved untenable);

  3. the idea of wholeness (which says that things "do indeed hang
  together") - this proved rather unoriginal;

  4. the idea of self as enlarging itself to become Self - the idea is
  venerable as it goes back to Buddhism and the Buddha, but perhaps not
  distinctive enough to be the central message of an ecological
  philosophy.

From the quotation it is clear that Skolimowski has in mind ecological
philosophy in general and not only attempts to articulate
philosophically the central messages of the deep ecology movement which
I strongly support. When I recommend pluralism in ecophilosophy it is
because I think it is an important job to listen to non-philosophers in
the movement and to try to clarify philosophical assumptions. The
attempts will naturally lead to very different conceptualizations.

A direct answer to what is stated in the quoted passage requires some
preliminary remarks.

A philosophy which I take to be in harmony with the tenets of the deep
ecology movement intends to outline a total view and may for certain
limited purposes be said to have four levels:

Level 1 is that of the very ultimate premisses of the ecophilosopher.
They are philosophical (metaphysical), or squarely religious in the
sense of a positive religion. As an example of recent Level 1
formulations I may refer to that of Gary Snyder. It opens with the
following sentence (only slightly modified by me):

  ... The universe and all creatures in it are intrinsically in a state
  of complete wisdom, love and compassion, acting in natural response
  and mutual interdependence.[2]

Clearly some philosophers will either not agree to this, or articulate
it very differently, or feel that they do not quite understand what is
meant. But it is, and will always remain, an open question as to what
extent the different articulations reveal definite disagreements or
incompatibilities. Mankind has tried out Level 1 formulations for only a
few thousand years. What I - with my limited capacities of
understanding - have witnessed in my philosophical lifetime (logical
empiricism, existentialism, ordinary language philosophy, Wittgenstein
worship, ..) does not impress me as anything definitive or anything we
all ought to accept.

Anyhow, the central message of the deep ecology movement should not be
looked for at Level 1 - if "centrality" implies some measure of common
stand within that movement.

On Level 2 I have tried to formulate a common ground. When George
Sessions suggested we might look for a set of principles of deep
ecology, I said I wanted to call them common key terms or slogans. (My
bad idea may be explained by Skolimowski in terms of still active
renmant of analytical philosophizing on my part). Together we agreed
upon a set of 8 points.

I do not think Level 2 may be said to contain sets of formulations of
‘the central message’, but any message substantially incompatible with
those formulations should not, I think, be accepted as expressions of
the central message of deep ecology. That would water down the name and
invite misunderstandings.

What then about the four candidates Skolimowski mentioned?

1. "The principle of anti-anthropocentrism". This is a negative
principle and unsuitable for the most positive movement of the Century.
No supporter of the deep ecology movement has, as far as I know, meant
to use such a principle as an adequate expression of its central
message. But, of course, the movement rejects narrow human centered
norms as acceptance for large scale human interference in nature.
‘Narrow’ is a useful term, talking about usefulness for humans. Nature
conservation is useful, for instance, in preventing the dismay, anger,
sorrow, and frustration which an increasing part of humanity experiences
when contemplating contemporary destruction. The reference to this kind
of usefulness is not to the narrow kind fought by deep ecology. It does
not belong to ‘anthropocentrism’ in the usage of this term within the
movement.

2. "The principle of radical egalitariansim". Thanks to much public and
private discussion, certain unsuitable interpretations of terms like
"biospheric egalitarianism" have been clarified (to a certain degree)
and rejected. What I associate with such terms may be formulated as
follows, but only provided the term "to have the right to" is accepted:
"There is a right that all living beings have in common: the right to
live and flourish." If I kill a mosquito it is because it annoys me too
much, not because I have more right, or a different right, to live and
flourish than the mosquito.

Properly formulated, a principle of biocentric egalitarianism might be
suitable as part of a central message. There are, however, many
thoughtful people who persist in connecting the term with a general norm
against any killing or injuring of any living beings by humans, even if
it is done for the satisfaction of vital human needs. Such a norm is
scarcely suitable as an expression of a fairly general conception within
the movement. My tentative conclusion is that the Latin terms
"egalitarianism" or "equalitarianism" should be used, if at all, with
caution. It is, however, slightly misleading to say that a definite
principle of radical egalitarianism has been proposed as an expression
of the central message but "proved untenable".

3. "The idea of wholeness", "everything hangs together". Too vague and
too general as an adequate expression of a central message. Scarcely
accepted as such by supporters of the movement, and therefore scarcely
proved untenable after being accepted.

4. "The idea of broadening and deepening self so that we identify with
all living beings (including ‘Gaia’)." This kiknd of idea is central in
a published version of my ‘ecosophy T’. But it is a typical Level 1
idea, not something proposed to be used as a Level 2 idea. The central
message should, if confined to any definite level, be expressed through
ideas of Level 2 rather than 1. An idea of Self-realization (rather than
self-realization or ego-trip lifestyle) has not been proposed by me as
an adequate expression of the central message of the whole movement.
‘Self-realization!’ is central in the sense of the only non-derived norm
in my ecosophy T.

The ultimate intuitive source of the idea of the greater Self seems in
my case to be the typical experience of a small child lying flat on my
stomach looking into a tiny, tiny pond. At the first moment no moving
life is seen. But after a couple of minutes, more and more creatures are
noticed, and after, let us say, half an hour, their life style is
gradually manifesting itself. A whole world! And worlds within worlds!

A whole world is destroyed if one day the pond is ravaged. The intense
identification with each creature and the pond as a magnficent,
infinitely complex whole fosters the feeling of unity with each
creature, and with the many sub-wholes and of course with the supreme
totality.

Such experiences are enough! No definite Buddhist or other cultural
phenomena are strictly necessary to start developing the basic attitude
expressed, among other ways, by the term the greater Self, and the norm
‘Self-realization!’ This is only to fight the idea that there is
something extraordinary and culturally sophisticated involved. Just the
ordinary sensitivity of a loving child.[3]

In conclusion, Skolimowski’s discussion of these four items does not
warrant a diagnosis of "deep conceptual trouble". We are always on the
way, trying to articulate what is hard to articulate and what cannot be
articulated once and forever. I believe I understand Henryk Skolimowski,
who is perhaps a little more passionate and impatient in his thinking.
Conceptualization is a permanent job, and diversity should not be
confused with disagreement. In our efforts Kropotkin’s slogan ‘Mutual
aid!’ is central.

III

The difference between the shallow and deep ecology movements has been
made using many words. It would obviously be a risky undertaking to
condense such descriptions using only one or two (anti-anthropocentrism,
radical egalitarianism ...), or even a couple of hundred. The latter was
tried in the Naess-Sessions version of Level 2. For me and many others
one of the sources of confidence that the shallow/deep distinction has
an empirical basis is furnished by the extensive discussions during
direct actions. Where people are sitting or standing together for hours
or days, or living in tents, or in other simple ways for days, weeks or
even months, there is ample time to try to classify and articulate the
motivations and beliefs explaining one’s participation. There is, as far
as I can judge, an astonishing similarity of basic attitude all over the
globe - but people in cultural minorities, also people who feel quite
alone because their nearest and dearest don’t understand, feel
‘different’ from nearly all of their daily contacts.

In this situation it is important not only through music, arts, poetry,
and literature, to reach groups all over the globe, but also to offer
cognitive articulations in everyday and philosophical language. People
have reason to feel that they have friends in all countries, people who
are not just mildly regretting the excessive interference with life
conditions on this planet and offering ways of diminishing some of the
most conspicuous evils, but people who are deeply disturbed and shaken.
These are people who feel the interference as attacks on themselves and
the meaning of their life on Earth. I remember with a smile the outcry
many years ago in groups all over the world when there were rumors that
the emperor penguins of the Antarctic might die out because pollution
resulted in eggshells that were too thin. "How dare we interfere with
those beings!" The reaction did not stem from any expectation or wish to
visit the penguins or otherwise derive pleasure from them. Penguins are
felt to be part of the whole we belong to, not to a whole that belongs
to us. (As in the sense of our small selves on our ego-trips).

Experience in direct actions, and in more conventional situations of
social conflicts, makes it worthwhile to try to increase the contacts
between deeply concerned people by every nonviolent means at our
disposal.

The conceptualizations offered by the distinction between the shallow
and the deep ecology movements are one such means at our disposal.

IV

Does Skolimowski disagree significantly with the kind of thinking
presented above? Scarcely - as seen from the following quotation with
which I agree:

  Part of the problem is that the search for the ‘central message
  formulation’ may be misguided. It is more prudent to assume that there
  is not, and cannot be, one single central message of deep ecology.
  Deep ecology, and Ecophilosophy for that matter, is not a deductive
  system - based on a set of axioms or one central message, from which
  the whole system flawlessly and deductively follows. We are now cured
  of this idea.

  But he continues:

  What are the basic values of deep ecology: It is not very difficult to
  say as the whole notion of intrinsic value has been thrown into a
  quandry. Has it (the notion of intrinsic value) become invalidated as
  the result of our analytical scrutiny?

Unhappily, I am so used to my own version of ‘applied semantics’ that I
cannot avoid using it in discussions.[4] I use the expression "intrinsic
value" freely, even in academic discussions with philosophers, because
analytical scrutiny has not decisively supported the conclusion that
there are no clarifying interpretations (‘precizations’ in my
terminology) which makes it acceptable within a high level of
conceptual, philosophical framework. There are in my view several
‘directions of precization’, a narrower concept than that of ‘direction
of analysis’, which may lead to this satisfactory result. Warwick Fox
suggests one, and does not pretend it is the only one. But what if we
start to doubt that there are any at all? This, to some of us, would be
disquieting, but I do not consider problematic character to present a
strong reason to stop using it, even in philosophical discussions.[5]
(We use ‘truth’, ‘fact’, ‘ego’...). For me, intrinsic value expresses
something which from the point of view of philosphical phenomenology
seems to deserve the title of a basic experience. I can recall that
experience at any moment.

Anyhow, widening what Aristotles says about the belief that one cannot
prove everything one asserts, the belief that every term we use can be
elucidated within a definite philosophical framework is due to lack of
education (paideia).

The term ‘intrinsic value’ "has thrown into a guandry" among
philosophers. So what? Any term found interesting enough to reflect upon
has been turned into a quandry by some philosophers. I do not feel that
deep ecology "will become a set of philosophical abstractions". But I
see the danger that those supportes of The Trumpeter, who are not
especially interested in philosophical analysis may get a little
frustrated - and with good reason. So I shall stop here.

______

Arne Naess can be reached through the Department of Philosophy,
University of Oslo, P.O.Box 1024, Blindern, Oslo 3, Norway. Arne has
written extensively on environmental philosophy and also on a wide
variety of other topics. His book Ecology, Community and Lifestyle is
being translated from Norwegian into English and will be available
sometime next year. Some of his recent publications in English in
environmental philosophy include his influential "The Shallow and the
Deep, Long-Range Ecology Movements: A Summary", Inquiry 16 (1973):
95-100, "Self-realization in Mixed Communities of Humans, Bears, Sheep
and Wolves", Inquiry 22 (1979): 231-241; "A Defense of the Deep Ecology
Movement", Environmental Ethics 6 (1984): 265-270. Arne’s reputation in
philosophy was originally gained for his work in semantics, but his
interests and published work have a much wider range, including work in
Spinozian ethics, Gandhian ethics of non-violence, scepticism, and
philosophy of science. His work on Gandhi appears in the book Gandhi and
Group Conflict: An Exploration of Satyargraha; Theoretical Background,
Universitetsforlaget, Oslo, 1974. He resigned his Chair in Philosophy at
the University of Oslo in 1970 in order to devote himself more fully to
the urgent environmental problems facing us.

[1] Published in Trumpeter, 3, 1986, pp.18-22.

[2] Gary Snyder, "Buddhism and the Possibilities of a Planetary
Culture", in Bill Devall and George Sessions, Deep Ecology, Gibbs M.
Smith: Salt Lake City, 1985, p.251.

[3] The ontogenesis of the unity-in-diversity attitude is traced in "How
my philosophy seemed to develop", in Andre Mercier (ed.) Philosophers on
their own Work, Vol.10, Peter Lang: Bern, pp. 209.226.

[4] Communication and Argument: Elements of Applied Semantics,
Oslo/London 1966.

[5] Anthony Weston has in an interesting article ("Beyond Intrinsic
Value: Pragmatism in Environmental Ethics", Environmental Ethics, Vol.7,
1985, pp.321-340) postulated a set of premisses from which follows that
it is a reasonable policy to avoid the expression ‘intrinsic value’. I
do not accept that set. A convenient starting-point for arguments in
favor of the usage of ‘intrinsic value’ is a study of the expression
‘for his (her) own sake’. We distinguish between what we do for somebody
because of his or her ‘value’ in definite concrete situations for
definite purposes. And what we do for a person, for the sake of that
person, in just as definite concrete situations. We then do not measure
his or her value for some aims external to the person himself. A
convenient way of arguing is that the sum of instrmental values do not
equal to the total value, because the means-relations do not take into
account that the person has a value in himself, an intrinsic value. I
then ask: have only human beings intrinsic value? Why?
