1986FF

Still more notes on the key terms of the deep ecology movement

Arne Naess

1. It is convenient to use 'deep ecology' as an abbreviation for 'the
deep ecology movement'. But sometimes it leads to confusion. The shorter
term is sometimes used for a kind of philosophy or theoretical position.
Obviously, a social movement is not a kind of philosophy or theoretical
position. I shall continue to use 'deep ecology' at least sometimes as
an abbreviation because what I am essentially concerned with is a
movement, not a philosophy. As to philosophy, I try to sketch one under
the name of ecosophy T.

Lester Milbrath in his Environmentalism, Vanguard of a New Society, p.26
et seq. belongs to those who seem to use 'deep ecology' as a name for a
kind of philosophy or theoretical position. But the movement belongs
rather to what he, broadly speaking, calls 'environmentalism'.

A deep ecology position, for instance, formulated in its essentials in 8
points, whether ultimately based on philosophical or religious
foundations, stands or falls with the completely inescapable, intimate
connectedness of these foundations with application in concrete conflict
situations. They must relate to decision and actions. From a normative
point of view deep ecology starts and ends, if put on a verbal
systematical derivational form, with sentences with an exclamation mark
(!), not with a fullstop. Or, from a point of view different from the
broad view of logical derivation, deep ecology may be said to start with
decisions and actions and ends with the formulation of basic, general
guidelines for decisions and actions. From both perspectives the
interconnection not only between 'theory' and practice is essential, but
the interconnection with ultimate philosophical or religious basis
beyond 'theories' of the usual kinds - the scientific or philosophical
theories in a restricted academic sense. If the term 'deep ecology' is
still to retain a specific challenge into the 90s I believe this
interconnectedness is crucial.

So much about the interconnectedness of norms of various levels. What I
call, perhaps somewhat misleadingly, the hypotheses - the sentences with
a fullstop. Basically, expressions of experience of reality, how things
are 'seen', how they 'are', are sentences within the realm of ontology,
the part of philosophy that tries to furnish basic views about the
structure of 'what there is' and which are the main classes of items
which exist. (The spiritual, the material, the past, the present...,
times, spaces ...).

Ontological assertions are implied by every normative sentences. An
example: 'All life forms have intrinsic value!'. Life forms? Life? In
order to relate to the exclamation sentence conception of life is
implied. What conceptions? Indeterminable [?] phenomenological analysis
seems relevant. If the exclamation sentence elicites a firm, stable
acceptance, the conception is likely to be such that the act-acceptance
is experienced as something obviously valid.

In the deep ecology movement the interconnectedness of ontological views
and norms of all levels is stressed. Perhaps the ontology is given
primacy over ethics in the sense that the acceptance of certain ways of
experiencing what is real makes at least psychologically inevitable
certain respectual, or neutral, ways of handling the real. (An example:
'I belong to this place, therefore...'.) An experience of a place may
elicit exclamatory sentences about its holiness or worthiness of
protection. In order to make others accept a decision to protect the
place, it is seen to be important to try to make them experience the
place in the same way. This primacy of the ontological is sorrowfully
confirmed when one tries to convince people of the validity of a genuine
environmental ethics, who simply lack the implied view of reality.

In any case, an interconnectedness of ontological views with all levels
of norms is implied in the idea of an ecosophy, a philosophy proposed by
supporters of the deep ecology movement.

2. The verb 'to derive' is used in many ways. Some may be expressed more
precisely by the phrase 'to derive logically'. In the vernacular
'logically' is a very wide term compared to its use in textbooks of
logic. For instance, people would be inclined to say that 'Peter Jones
is mortal' is derivable logically from 'All humans are mortal'. But in
textbook-logic at least one more premise is necessary, namely 'Peter
Jones is human'. A couple of diagrams in ecophilosophy show logical
derivations in a broad vernacular sense. (See for example
Ecophilosohical Newsletter VI, or Deep Ecology, pp.226-227.) Grave
misunderstandings develop if logical derivation is confused with various
'genetic' relations.

In relation to each sentence in the logical derivation diagrams one may
ask: what led people to accept the sentence? In some cases a logical
derivation may have been what led people to accept it, but that is
exceptional. As a class name for other factors than the logical I
propose to call them genetic. Acceptance of a sentence as a valid
expression of a norm or a non-normative belief is a process and so are
the various factors of motivation and causes leading up to the
acceptance.

One of the main kinds of processes leading up th norms of
non-discrimination is generalization. Processes of widening of
identification result in an effort to stop looking down upon people of
other colors than one's own. If the change is articulated it is natural
to describe it as a generalization of norms formerly held to be only
valid in relation to people of one's own color. Analogous
generalizations lead to acceptance of very general sentences such as
'all life forms have intrinsic value' or 'every animal regardless of
usefulness for narrow human interests has value in itself'.

The main point is that the genesis of an ecosophy or a philosophy of
deep ecology is a complex affair which from the point of view of
research involves not only all social sciences but also the biological.
The literature is already quite comprehensive, tracing historical and
other roots of various kinds of environmental movements and positions.
It is to be expected that the literature will grow fast because of the
growing attention paid to what is happening to the planet as a whole,
and to the difficulties in adjusting policies to what is already known
about the situation.

Risking an illustration, I have made the right hand side of the
following diagram illustrate the many genetic connections. The left hand
side corresponds to the four levels in the Apron Diagram. The small
two-way arrow at the bottom illustrates the influence of decisions on
other decisions. The arrow from level 4 to level 3 refers to the
influence of decisions (and actions) upon the middle level 'theorems' or
views connecting the broad guidelines expressed at level 2 with
particular decisions (of level 4). The other arrows indicate analogous
influence. In short, process can influence any other - causally,
motivationally. Of course, what is not in the diagram, is the
connectedness with process beyond its boundary. 'Everything is connected
with everything else' is still a good slogan.

The Mandala

Does the insight in causal and motivational influence reduce the
importance of derivations? Not in any way. We are always active in both
tracing some influences and tracing some derivations. But there is a
tendency to confuse the different points of view. Better to keep them
apart - for pragmatic reasons and for reasons of clarity of thought.
