1986.5

The Deep Ecology Movement: Some Philosophical Aspects[1]

Arne Naess[2]

1. Deep Ecology on the Defensive

Increasing pressures for growth have placed the vast majority of
ecologists and other environmental professionals into a defensive
position. Let me illustrate.

The field ecologist K, who both professionally and personally vigorously
advocated deep ecological principles in the late sixties, encountered
considerable resistance. Colleagues in the university said he should
keep to his cience and nt meddle in philosophical and political matters.
He should resist the temptation to become a prominent "popularizer"
through exposure in the mass media. Nevertheless, he continued and
influenced thousands (includig myself). He became a recognized
professional "expert" in assessing the damage done when bears killed or
maimed sheep or other domestic animals in Norway. According to the law,
their owners are to be paid damages. Licensed hunters can get permission
to shoot a bear if its misdeeds become considerable.[3] Growth pressures
required consolidating the sheep industry, and sheepowners became fewer,
richer, and more prone to live in towns. Due to wage increases, they
could not afford to hire shepherds to watch the flock, so the sheep were
left alone even more than before. And growth now required placing sheep
on what were traditionally "bear territories". In spite of this
invasion, bear populations grew, and troubles multiplied.

What was K's reaction? Setting limits to human encroachments on bear
territories? Direct application of his deep ecology perspective? Quite
the contrary. He adopted a shallow wildlife management perspective which
defended the sheepowners: more money in compensation for losses, quicker
compensation, and immediate hiring of hunters to reduce te bear
population. Other deep ecologists noted with concern the change of his
public "image", had K really abandoned his former value priorities?
Privately he insisted: No. But, in public, he was silent.

The reason for K's unexpected actions was not difficult to find: the
force of economic growth was so strong that the laws protecting bears
would be changed in a direction highly unfavorable to the bears if the
sheeepowners were not soon pacified by accepting some of their demands.
And someof their demands seemed reasonable. After all, it did cost a lot
of money to hire and equip rescuers to locate a flock of sheep which had
been harassed by a bear and, further, to prove the bear's guilt. And the
bureaucratic procedures involved were time consuming. In short, K had
not changed his basic value priorities at all. rather, he had adopted a
purely defensive compromise. He stopped promoting his deep ecological
philosophy publicly in order to retain credibility and standing among
opponents of his principles.

And what is true of K is true of thousands more. These people often hold
responsible positions in society, where they might strengthen
responsible environmental policy, but, given the exponential forces of
growth, their publications are limited to narrowly professional and
specialized concerns. Their writings are surely competent, but lack a
deeper and mor comprehensive perspective (although I admit that there
are some brilliant exceptions). If professional ecologists persist in
voicing their value priorities, their jobs ar often in peril, or they
tend to lose influence and status among those who are in charge of
general policies. Privately, they may admit the necessity for deep and
far-reaching changes, but they remain silent in public. As a result,
their positive impact on the public has largely vanished. Deeply
concerned people feel abandoned by the "experts".

In ecologica debates many participants know a lot about particular
conservation policies in particular places, and many others have strong
opinions regarding fundamental philosophical questions of environmental
ethics, but only a few have both qualities. When they are silent, the
loss is formidable.

Let me illustrate again. A family of four decide to acquire four chairs
for a small room, newly added to the home. They buy the chairs and
everybody has peace of mind. But then one of them gets an urge to put
ten more chairs into the room. Two of the family who are technically
talented and eager to satisfy any "need", use their time to solve the
sophisticated physical and mathematical problems involved. They ask the
fourth member to work overtime to get the money to purchase the ten
chairs. But she answers that the chairs are unnecessary for a life rich
in intrinsic value and simple in means. She begins to argue for her
view, but the two technocrats insist that first she should work through
all the alternative solutions to the 10-Chair problem. At last she
wonderfully simplifies the argument. If the ten chairs are not a desired
end, it is pointless to discuss the means by which this might be
achieved. The technically talented find other outlets for their surplus
energy, for there are always enough legitimate problems to work on.

The complicated question of how industrial societies can increase energy
production with the least undesirable consequences is of the same kind:
a waste of time if the increase is pointless in relation to ultimate
ends. When thousands of experts hired by government and other big
institutions devote their time to this complicated problem, it is
difficult for the public to learn that many of them judge the problem
pointless and irrelevant. What is irrelevant, according to them, are the
problems of how to stabilize and eventually decrease comsumption without
loss of life quality.

2. A Call to Speak Out

What I advocate and argue for is this: even those who completely subsume
ecological policies under the narrow ends of human health and well-being
cannot attain their more modest aims, at least not fuly and easily,
without being joined by supporters of deep ecology. They need what these
people have to contribute, as this will work for them more often than it
works against them. Those in charge of environmental policies, even if
they are resource-oriented (and growth tolerating?) decision-makers,
will increasingly welcome if only for tactical and not fundamental
reasons, what supporters of deep ecology have to say. Even though the
more radical ethic may seem nonsensical or untenable to them, they know
that its advocates are doing in practice conservation work that sooner
or later must be done. They concur with the practice, although they
operate from diverging theories. If I am right, the time is ripe for
professional deep ecologist supporters to break their silence and freely
express their deepest concerns. A bolder advocacy of deep ecology by
those who are working within the shallow, resource-oriented
"environmental" sphere is the best strategy for regaining some of the
strength of this movement among the general public, and thereby to
contribute, however modestly, toward a turning of the tide.

What do I mean by saying that even the more modest aims of shallow
environmentalism have a need for deep ecology? We can see this by
considering the World Conservation Strategy prepared by the
International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources
(IUCN) with the advice, cooperation and financial assitance of the
United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) and thw World Wildlife
Fund (WWF). The argument in this important publication is through and
through homocentric in the sense that all its recommendations are
justified in terms of their effects upon human health and well-being.
Even the recommended environmental ethic, with its attendant
environmental education campaign, has humans in harmony with nature for
human good. "A new ethic, embracing plants and animals as well as
people, is required for human societies to live in harmony with the
natural world on which they depend for survival and well-being."[4] Such
an ethic would surely be more effective if it were acted upon by people
who believe in its validity, rather than by those who merely believe in
its usefulness. This, I think, will come to be understood more and more
by those in charge of educational policies. Quite simply, it is indecent
for a teacher to proclaim an ethic only for tactical reasons. Further,
this point applies to all aspects of world conservation strategy.
Conservation strategy will be more eagerly implemented by persons who
love what they are conserving, and who are convinced that what they love
is intrinsically lovable. Such lovers will not want to hide their
attitudes and values, but rather will increasingly give voice to them in
public. They have a genuine ethics of conservation, not merely a
tactically useful instrument for social and political ends.

In short, environmental education campaigns can fortunately combine
anthropocentric arguments with a practicalland and sea ethic based
either on a deeper and more fundamental naturalistic philosophical or
religious perspective, and on a set of norms resting on intrinsic
values. But the inherent strength of this overall position will be lost
if those who work professionally on environmental problems do not give
public testimony to these fundamental norms.

This article is hortatory, in the positive etymological sense of that
word. I seek "to urge, incite, instigate, encourage, cheer" (Latin:
hortari). This may seem unacademic in a philosophical journal, but I
consider it justifiable because of an intimate relationship between
hortatory sentences and basic philosophical views which I will formulate
in Section 8 below.

3. What is Deep Ecology?

The term "deep ecology movement" has so far been used without trying to
define it. One should not expect much from definitions of movements.
Think of terms like "conservatism", "liberalism", or "feminist
movement". And there is no need that supporters should adhere to exactly
the same definition. In what follows, a set of principles, or key terms
and phrases, agreed upon by George Sessions and myself, are tentatively
proposed as basic to deep ecology.[5]

(1) The well-being and flourishing of human and non-human life on Earth
have value in themselves (synonym: intrinsic value, inherent value).
These values are independent of the usefulness of the non-human world
for human purposes.

(2) Richness and diversity of life forms contribute to the realization
of these values and are also values in themselves.

(3) Humans have no right to reduce this richness and diversity except to
satisfy vital needs.

(4) the flourishing of human life and cultures is compatible with a
substantial decrease of the human population. The flourishing of
non-human life requires such a decrease.

(5) present human interference with the non-human world is excessive,
and the situation is rapidly worsening.

(6) Policies must therefore be changed. These policies affect basic
economic, technological, and ideological structures. The resulting state
of affairs will be deeply different from the present.

(7) The ideological change is mainly that of appreciating life quality
(dwelling in situations of inherent value) rather than adhering to an
increasingly higher standard of living. There will be a profound
awareness of the difference between big and great.

(8) Those who subscribe to the foregoing points have an obligation
directly or indirectly to try to implement the necessary changes.

Comments on the Basic Principles

RE (1):

  This formulation refers to the biosphere, or more accurately to the
  ecosophere as a whole. This includes individuals, species,
  populations, habitat, as well as human and non-human cultures. From
  our current knowledge of all-pervasive intimate relationships, this
  implies a fundamental deep concern and respect. Ecological processes
  on the planet should, on the whole, remain intact. "The world
  environment should remain 'natural'" (Gary Snyder).

  The term "life" is used here in a more comprehensive non-technical way
  to refer also to what biologists classify as "non-living": rivers
  (watersheds), landscapes, ecosystems. For supporters of deep ecology,
  slogans such as "let the river live" illustrate this broader usage so
  common in most cultures.

  Inherent value, as used in (1), is common in deep ecology literature
  ("The presence of inherent value in a natural object is independent of
  any awareness, interest, or appreciation of it by any conscious
  being.")[6]

RE(2):

  More technically, this is a formulation concerning diversity and
  complexity. From an ecological standpoint, complexity and symbiosis
  are conditions for maximizing diversity. So-called simple, lower, or
  primitive species of plants and animals contribute essentially to
  richness and diversity of life. They have value in themselves and are
  not merely steps toward the so-called higher or rational life forms.
  The second principle presupposes that life itself, as a process over
  evolutionary time, implies an increase of diversity and richness. The
  refusal to acknowledge that some life forms have greater or lesser
  intrinsic value than others (see point 1 and 2) runs counter to the
  formulations of some ecological philosophers and New Age writers.

  Complexity, as referred to here, is different from complication. Urban
  life may be more complicated than life in a natural setting without
  being more complex in the sense of multi-faceted quality.

RE(3):

  The term "vital need" is left deliberately vague to allow considerable
  latitude in judgment. Differences in climate and related factors,
  together with differences in the structures of societies as they now
  exist, need to be considered. (For some Eskimos, snowmobiles are
  necessary today to satisfy vital needs, not to tourists).

RE(4):

  People in the materially richest countries cannot be expected to
  reduce their excessive interference with the non-human world to a
  moderate level overnight. The stabilization and reduction of the human
  population will take time. Interim strategies need to be developed.
  But this in no way excuses the present complacency. the extreme
  seriousness of our current situation must first be realized. But the
  longer we wait the more drastic will be the measures needed. Until
  deep changes are made, substantial decreases in richness and diversity
  are liable to occur: the rate of extinction of species will be ten to
  one hundred times greater than any other period of earth history.

RE(5):

  This formulation is mild. For a realistic assessment of the situation,
  see the unabbreviated version of the I.U.C.N.'s World Conservation
  Strategy. There are other works to be highly recommended, such as
  Gerald Barney's Global 2000 Report to the President of the United
  States.

The slogan of "noninterference" does not imply that

  humans should not modify some ecosystems as do other species. Humans
  have modified the earth and will probably continue to do so. At issue
  is the nature and extent of such interference.

The fight to preserve and extend areas of wilderness or

  nearwilderness should continue and should focus on the general
  ecological functions of these areas (one such function: large
  wilderness areas are required in the biosphere to allow for continued
  evolutionary speciation of animals and plants). Most present
  designated wilderness areas and game preserves are not large enough to
  allow for such speciation.

RE(6):

  Economic growth as conceived and implemented today by the industrial
  states is incompatible with (1) - (5). There is only a faint
  resemblance between ideal sustainable forms of economic growth and
  present policies of the industrial societies. And "sustainable" means
  "sustainable in relation to humans."

Present ideology tends to value things because they

  are scarce and because they have a commodity value. There is prestige
  in vast consumption and waste (to mention only several relevant
  factors.)

  Whereas "self-determination", "local community", and "think globally,
  act locally", will remain key terms in the ecology of human societies,
  nevertheless the implementation of deep changes requires increasingly
  global action, action across borders.

  Governments in Third World countries are mostly uninterested in deep
  ecology issues. When the governments of industrial societies try to
  promote ecological measures through Third World governments, then
  practically nothing is accomplished (e.g.with problems of
  desertification).Given this situation, support for global action
  through non-governmental international organizations becomes
  increasingly important. Many of these organizations are able to act
  globally "from grassroots to grassroots" thus avoiding negative
  governmental interference.

  Cultural diversity today requires advanced technology, that is,
  techniques that advance the basic goals of each culture. So-called
  soft, intermediate, and alternative technologies are steps in this
  direction.

RE(7):

  Some economists criticize the term "quality of life" because it is
  supposed to be vague. But on closer inspection, what they consider to
  be vague is actually the non-quantiative nature of the term. One
  cannot quantify adequately what is important for the quality of life
  as discussed here, and there is no need to do so.

RE(8):

  There is ample room for different opinions about priorities: what
  should be done first, what next? What is most urgent? What is clearly
  necessary as opposed to what is highly desirable but not absolutely
  pressing?

The above formulations may be useful for many supporters of the deep
ecology movement. But others will certainly feel they are imperfect,
even misleading. If they need to formulate in a few words what is basic
in deep ecology, they will propose an altenative set of sentences. I
shall of course be glad to refer to them as alternatives. There ought to
be a measure of diversity in what is considered basic and common.

Should we call the movement "the deep ecological movement"?[7] There are
at least six other designations which cover most of the same issues:
"Ecological Resistance", used by John Rodman in important discussions;
"The New Natural Philosophy" coined by Joseph Meeker; "Eco-philosophy",
used by Sigmund Kvaløy and others to emphasize (1) a highly critical
assessment of industrial growth societies from a general ecological
point of view and (2) the ecology of the human species; "Green
Philosophy and Politics", while the term "green" is often used in
Europe, in the United States "green" has a misleading association with
the rather "blue" Green Revolution; "Sustainable Earth Ethics", as used
by G.Tyler Miller; and "Ecosophy", eco-wisdom, which is my own favorite
term. Others could also be mentioned.

Why use the adjective "deep"? This question will be easier to answer
after the contrast is made between shallow and deep ecological concerns.

What I am talking about is not a philosophy in any academic sense, nor
is it institutionalized as a religion or an ideology. Various persons
come together in campaigns and direct actions. They form a circle of
friends supporting the same kind of lifestyle, which others term
"simple", but they themselves think is rich and many-sided. They agree
on a vast array of political issues, although they may otherwise support
different political parties. As in all social movements, slogans and
rhetoric are indispensible for ingroup coherence. They react together
against the same threats in a predominantly non-violent way. Perhaps the
most influential participants are artists and writers who do not
articulate their insights in terms of professional philosophy, but do
express themselves in art or poetry. For these reasons, I use the term
"movement" rather than "philosophy.

4. Deep versus Shallow Ecology

A number of key terms and slogans from the environmental debate will
clarify the contrast between the shallow and the deep ecology movements.

A. Pollution

Shallow approach: technology seeks to purify the air and water and to
spread pollutions more evenly. Laws limit permissible pollution.
Polluting industries are preferably exported to developing countries.

Deep approach: Pollution is evaluated from a biospheric point of
view[8], not centering on its effects on human health, but on life as a
whole, including life conditions of every species and system. The
shallow reaction to acid rain is to avoid action by demands of more
research, demands to find species of trees tolerating high acidity etc.,
whereas the deep approach concentrates on what is going on in the total
ecosystem and asks for high priority fight against the economy and
technology responsible for acid rain.

The priority is to fight deep causes of pollution, not merely the
superficial, short range effects. The third and fourth worlds cannot
afford to pay the total costs of the war against pollution in their
regions, and consequently they require the assistance of the first and
second worlds. Exporting pollution is not only a crime against humanity,
but also against life.

B.Resources

Shallow approach: The emphasis is upon resources for humans, especially
for the present generation in affluent societies. On this view, the
resources of the earth belong to those who have the technology to
exploit them. There is confidence that resources will not be depleted
because, as they get rarer, a high market price will conserve them, and
substitutes will be found through technological progress. Further,
animals, plants, and natural objects are valuable only as resources for
humans. If no human use is known, they can be destroyed with
indifference.

Deep approach: The concern here is with resources and habitat for all
life forms for their own sake. No natural object is conceived of solely
as a resource. This then leads to a critical evaluation of human modes
of production and consumption. It is asked: to what extent does an
increase here favor ultimate values in human life? To what extent does
it satisfy vital needs, locally and globally? How can economic, legal,
and educational institutions be changed to counteract destructive
increases? How can resource use serve the quality of life rather than
the economic standard of living as generally promoted in consumerism?
There is an emphasis here on an ecosystem approach rather than just the
consideration of isolated life forms or local situations. There is a
long-range maximal perspective of time and space.

C.Population

Shallow approach: The threat of (human) overpopulation is seen mainly as
a problem for developing countries. One condones or even cheers
population increases in one's own country for shortsighted economic,
military, or other reasons; an increase in the number of humans is
considered a value in itself or as economically profitable. The issue of
"optimum population for humans" is discussed without reference to the
question of the "optimum population" of other life forms. The
destruction of wild habitats caused by an increasing human population is
accepted as an inevitable evil. Drastic decreases of wild life forms
tend to be accepted as long as as species are not driven to extinction.
Animal social relations are ignored. The long term substantial reduction
of the global human population is not seen as a desired goal. One has a
right to defend one's own borders against "illegal aliens", no matter
what the population pressures elsewhere.

Deep approach: It is recognized that excessive pressures on planetary
life conditions stem from the human population explosion. The pressure
stemming from industrial societies is a major factor, and population
reduction must have a high priority in those societies, as well as in
developing countries. Estimates of an optimal human population vary.
Some quantitative estimates are 100 million, 500 million, and 1000
million, but it is recognized that there must be a long range, humane
reduction through mild but tenacious political and economic measures.
This will make possible, as a result of increased habitat, population
growth for thousands of species which are now constrained by human
pressures.

D.Cultural diversity and appropriate technology

Shallow approach: Industrialization of the kind manifested in the West
is held to be the goal for developing countries. The universal adoption
of Western technology is compatible with mild cultural diversity and the
conservation of good (from the Western point of view) elements in
present non-industrial societies. There is a low estimate of deep
cultural differences which deviate significantly from Western standards.

Deep approach: Cultural diversity is an analogue on the human level to
the biological richness and diversity of life forms. We should give high
priority to cultural anthropology in education in industrial societies.
We should limit the impact of Western technology upon presently existing
non-industrial countries and defend the fourth world against foreign
domination. Political and economic policies should favor subcultures
within industrialized societies. Local, soft technologies will allow a
basic cultural assessment of any technical innovations, freely
criticizing so-called advanced technology and concepts of "progress".

E.Land and sea ethics

Shallow approach: Landscapes, ecosystems, rivers, and other wholes of
nature are cut into fragments, disregarding larger units and gestalts.
These fragments are regarded as the properties and resources of
individuals, organizations, or states. Conservation is argued in terms
of "multiple use" and "cost/benefit analysis". Social costs and long
term ecological costs are not included. Wildlife management conserves
nature for "future generations of humans". The erosion of soils or of
ground water quality is noted as a human loss, but a strong belief in
future technological progress makes deep changes seem unnecessary.

Deep approach: Earth does not belong to humans. The Norwegian
landscapes, rivers, fauna and flora, and the surrounding sea are not the
property of Norwegians. Humans only inhabit the lands, using resources
to satisfy vital needs. If their non-vital needs conflict with the vital
needs of non-humans, humans might yield. The destruction now goin on
will not be cured by a technological fix. Current arrogant notions in
industrial (and other) societies must be resisted.

F.Education and scientific enterprise

Shallow approach: The degradation of the environmental and resource
depletion necessitates the future training of experts who can advise on
how to combine economic growth with maintaining a healthy environment.
We are likely to need highly manipulative technology when global
economic growth makes further degradation inevitable. The scientific
enterprise must continue giving priority to the "hard" sciences. This
necessitates high educational standards with intense competition in
relevant "tough" areas of learning.

Deep approach: Education should concentrate on increased sensitivity to
non-consumptive goods and on such consumables that we have enough of for
all, provided sane ecological policies are adopted. Education will
therefore counteract the excessive valuation of things with a price tag.
There should be a shift from concentration upon "hard" to "soft"
sciences, stressing local and the global institutions, rather than
national. The educational objective of the World Conservation Strategy,
"building support for conservation", should be accorded priority within
the deeper framework of respect for the biosphere.

In the future, there will be no shallow movement, if shallow policies
are increasingly adopted by governments and, thus, need no support by a
special social movement.

5. But why a "deep" Ecology?

The decisive difference concerns willingness to question and to
appreciate the importance of questioning every economic and political
policy in public. The questioning is "deep" and public. It asks "why"
more insistently and consistently, taking nothing for granted. Deep
ecology can readily admit the practical effectiveness of homomcentric
arguments. "It is essential for conservation to be seen as central to
human interests and aspirations. At the same time, people - from heads
of state to the members of rural communities - will most readily be
brought to demand conservation if they themselves recongize the
contribution of conservation to the achievement of their needs, as
perceived by them, and the solution of their problems, as perceived by
them."[9] Since most policies serving the biosphere also serve humanity
in the long run, they may, as least initially, be accepted on the basis
of narrow "homocentric" arguments.

But such a tactical approach has significant limitations. There are
three dangers: some policies based on successful homocentric arguments
turn out to violate or compromise unduly the objectives of deeper
argumentation; the strong motivation to fight for decisive change and
the willingness to serve a great cause is weakened: and the complicated
arguments in human-centered conservation documents such as the World
Conservation Strategy go beyond the time and ability of many people to
assimilate and understand and also tend to provoke interminable
technical disagreements among experts. Special interest groups with
narrow short-term explitative objectives which run counter to saner
ecopolicies often exploit these disagreements and thereby stall the
debate and steps towards effective action. When arguing from deep
ecological premises, most of the complicated proposed technological
fixes need not be discussed at all. The relative merits of alternative
technology proposals in industrial societies concerned with how to
increase energy production are pointless if our vital needs have already
been met. The focus on vital issues activates mental energy and
strengthens motivation. The shallow environmental approach, on the other
hand, tends to make the human population more passive and disinterested
in environmental issues.

The deep ecology movement tries to clarify the fundamental
presuppositions underlying our economic approach in terms of value
priorities, philosophy and religion. In the shallow movement, argument
comes to a halt long before this. The deep ecology movement is therefore
"the ecology movement which questions deeper."

The terms "egalitarianism", "homocentrism", "anthropocentrism", and
"human chauvinsim" are often used to characterize points of view on the
shall-deep ecology spectrum. But these terms usually function as slogans
which are open to misinterpretation. They can imply that man is in some
respects only a "plain citizen" (Aldo Leopold) of the planet on a par
with all other species, but they are sometimes interpreted as denying
that humans have any "extraordinary" traits, or that in situations
involving vital interests, humans have no overriding obligations towards
their own kind. They have!

In any social movement, rhetoric has an essential function in keeping
members fighting together under the same banner. Rhetorical formulations
also serve to provoke interest among the outsiders. Of the better known
slogans, one might mention "Nature knows best", "Small is beautiful",
and "All things hang together". But clearly all things in the universe
do not hang together at the levels of quantum physics or relativity
theory. The slogan only expresses a doctrine of global, not cosmic,
relevance.

Only a minority of the supporters of deep ecology are academic
philosophers, such as myself. While deep ecology need not be a finished
philosophical system, this does not mean that its philosophers should
not try to be as clear as possible. So a discussion of deep ecology as a
derivational system may be of value.

6.Deep Ecology illustrated as a Derivational System

Underlying the eight tenets or principles presented in section three,
there are still more basic positions and norms which reside in
philosophical systems and various world religions. Schematically we may
represent the total views implied in the movement by streams of
derivation from the most fundamental norms and descriptive assumptions
to particular decisions in actual life situations. See illustration on
page 24.

This pyramidal model has some features in common with
hypothetico-deductive systems. The main difference, however, is that
some sentences at the top (=deepest) level are normative, and are
preferably expressed by imperatives. This makes it possible to arrive at
imperatives at the lowest derivational level, the crucial level in terms
of decisions. Thus, there are oughts in our premises, as well as in our
conclusions. We do not move from an is to an ought.

Just as in a hypothetico-deductive system in physics, where only the two
upper levels of the pyramid are thought of as forming physics as a
syste, so also in normative systems, only the upper levels are
considered to be part of the total system. The sentences in the lowest
part ar changing from day to day as life situations change.

The above derivational structure of a total view must not be taken too
seriously. It is not meant in any restrictive way to characterize
creative thinking within the deep ecology movement. That thinking moves
freely in and indirection. But some of us with a professional background
in science and analytical philosophy find it helpful.[10]

Answers to ultimate questions, i.e., the highest normative principles
and basic assumptions about the world, occur in the upper part of the
derivational pyramid. The first three basic principles of deep ecology
(see section 3 above) belong to the upper level of the pyramid because
they assert, in a general way, life in its diversity as a value in
itself, thus forming a norm against undue human interference. The next
four (4-7) tenets belong to the middle region because they are more
local, they view what is going on at the present. This involves factual
claims and projections about the consequences of present policies in
industrial and non-industrial countries. An application of the last
tenet (8) is at the lowest derivational level because it imposes an
obligation to take part in actions to change policies. Such an
obligation must be derivable from principles higher up in the pyramid.

There are few propositions at the top of the pyramid, a great variety at
the middle level, and innumerable recommendations at the bottom.

7.Multiple Roots of the Deep Ecology Principles

The deep ecology movement seriously questions the presuppositions of
shallow argumentation. Even what counts as a rational decision is
challenged, because "rational" is always defined in relation to specific
aims and goals. If a decision rational in relation to the lower level
aims ang goals of our pyramid but not in relation to the highest level,
then the decision should not be judged to be rational. If an
environmentally oriented policy decision is not linked to intrinsic
values, its rationality is yet undetermined. The deep movement connects
rationality with a set of philosophical and religious foundations. One
cannot expect the ulitmate premises to constitute rational conclusions.
There are no "deeper" premises available.

The deep ecological questioning reveals the fundamental normative
orientations. Shallow argumentation stops before reaching fundamentals
or jumps from the ultimate to the particular, that is, from level 1 to
level 4.

It is not normative claims that are at stake. Most (perhaps all) norms
presuppose ideas about how the world functions. Typically the vast
majority of propositions needed in normative systems are descriptive.
This holds of all levels.

Notice, however, that it does not follow that supporters of deep ecology
must have, on ultimate issues, identical beliefs. They do have common
attitudes about intrinsic values in nature, but these can, in turn (at a
still deeper level), be derived from different, mutually incompatible
sets of ultimate beliefs.

Thus, while a specific decision may be judged as rational from within
the derivational system (if there is such) of shallow ecology, it might
be judged irrational from within the derivational system of deep
ecology. What is rational within the deep ecology derivational pyramid
does not require unanimity in ontology and fundamental ethics. Deep
ecology as a conviction, with its subsequently derived practical
recommendations, can follow from several more comprehensive worldviews.

Those engaged in the deep movement have so far revealed their
philosophical or religious homes mainly to be in Christianity, Buddhism,
Taoism, or philosophy. The top level of the derivational pyramid can
therefore be made up of normative and descriptive principles which
belong to forms of Christianity, Buddhism, Taoism, and various
philosophical creeds.

Since the late seventies, numerous Christians in Europe and America,
some of them teachers of theology, have taken part actively in the deep
ecology movement. Their interpretations of the Bible and their
theological positions in general have been reformed from what was, until
recently, a dominating crudely anthropocentric emphasis within
Christianity.

There is an intimate relation between some forms of Buddhism and the
deep ecology movement. The history of Buddhist thought and practice,
especially the principles of non-violence, non-injury and reverence for
life, sometimes makes it easier for Buddhists to understand and
appreciate that movement than it is for Christians, despite a (sometimes
overlooked) blessedness which Jesus recommended in peace-making. I
mention Taoism chiefly because there is some basis for calling John Muir
a Taoist.[11]

Ecosophies are not religions in the classical sense, but are general
philosophies inspired by ecology. In the next section I will further
introduce Ecosophy T.

The adherents of different religions and philosophies disagree and may
not even ultimately understand each other at the foundational levels of
of conviction and experience. But they can have important derived views
in common, and these, though themselves derived, are nevertheless deep
enough to form what I wish to call the upper level of the deep ecology
derivational pyramid.

Some have worried that the mixture of religion and environmentalism
could prove a source of dogmatism, intolerance, and "mysticism" (in the
sense of obscurantism). So far, there is no evidence that this is
happening. Nature mysticism has little to do with obscurantism.[12]

8.Ecosophy T

The main theoretical complaint against shallow ecology is not that it is
based on a well-articulated but incorrect philosophical or religious
foundation. It is, rather, that there is a lack of depth or complete
absence of guiding philosophical or religious foundations.

In his excellent book on how to "live in the environment", G.Tyler
Miller writes:

  The American attitude (and presumably that of most industrialized
  nations) toward nature can be expressed as eight beliefs [four of
  which are reproduced here].

1. Humans are the source of all value.

2. Nature exists only for our use.

3. Our primary purpose is to produce and consume. Success

is based on material wealth.

4. Production and consumption must rise endlessly because

we have a right to an ever increasing material level of living.

But he adds an important reservation:

  Although most of us probably would not accept all of these statements,
  we act individually, corporately, and governmentally as if we did and
  this is what counts."[13]

When they are so baldly exposed, we might find that vey few persons
would actually subscribe to what Miller characterizes as "the American
attitude". Nevertheless, as Miller notices, most modern people (and not
only Amerivans!) behave as if they believed in such a creed. There is no
articulated philosophical or religious view from which "the American
attitude" is carefully justified.

Referring to the illustration, the shallow movement has not offered
examples of total views comprisng the four levels. I am tempted to say
that there will be no examples. Serious attempts to find a deep
justification of the way life on the planet is treated today (including
the threats of using nuclear "weapons") are doomed to failure. What I
say is meant as a challenge: is there a philosopher somewhere who would
like to try?

My main purpose in announcing that I feel at home in "Ecosophy T" is
didactic and dialectic. I hope to get others to announce their own
philosophy. If they say they have none, I maintain that they have, but
perhaps don't know their own views, or are too modest or inhibited to
proclaim what they believe. Following Socrates I want to provoke
questioning until others know where they stand on basic matters of life
and death. This is done using ecological issues, and also by using
Ecosophy T as a foil. But Socrates pretended in debate that he knew
nothing. My posture seems to be the opposite. I may seem to know
everything and to derive it magically from a small set of hypotheses
about the world. But both interpretations are misleading! Socrates did
not consistently claim to know nothing, nor do I in my Ecosophy T
pretend to have all that comprehensive knowledge. He claimed to know,
for instance, about the fallibility of humans claims to know.

So, here is Ecosophy T!.

Its fundamental norm is "Self-realization!". But I do not use this
expression in any narrow, individualistic sense. I want to give it an
expanded meaning based on the distinction between Self and self
conceived in certain Eastern traditions of atman, comprising all the
life forms, and selves (jivas) as usually interpreted in social and
personal life. Using five words: maximum (long range, universal) Self
realization![14] If I had to give up the term fearing its inevitable
misunderstanding, I would use the term "symbiosis". "Maximize
Self-realization!" could be interpreted in the direction of colossal
egotrips. But "Maximize symbiosis!" could be interpreted in the opposite
direction, that of the elimination of individuality in favor of
collectivity.

Viewed systematically, not individually, maximum Self-realization
implies maximizing the manifestations of life. So I next derive the
second term, "Maximize (long range, universal) diveristy!" A corollary
is that the higher the levels of Self-realization which are attained by
a person, the more any further increases depends upon the
Self-realization of others. "Altruism" is a natural consequence of this
identification.

This leads to an hypothesis about an inescapable increase of
identification with other beings when one's own self-realization
increases. We increasingly see ourselves in others, and others in
ourselves. The self is extended and deepened as a natural process of the
realization of its potentialities in others.

Universalizing, we can derive the norm, "Self-realization for every
being!". From "Diversity!" and a hypothesis that maximum diversity
implies a maximum of symbiosis, is derived the norm "Maximum
symbiosis!". Further, we work for life conditions such that there is a
minimum of coercion in the life of others. And so on![15]

A philosophy as a worldview inevitably has implications in practical
situations. Ecosophy T therefore without apology moves on to concrete
questions of lifestyle. These will obviously show great variation
because of differences in hypotheses about the world in which each of us
live, and in the "factual" statements about the concrete situations in
which we make a decision. I shall limit myself to a couple of areas
where my "style" of thinking and behaving seem somewhat strange to
friends and others who know a little about my philosophy. Firstly, a
somewhat extreme appreciation of diversity; positive appreciation of the
existence of styles and behaviors which I personally detest or dind
nonsensical (but not clearly incompatible with symbiosis); enthusiasm
for "the mere" diversity of species or varieties within a genus of
plants or animals; support, as the head of a department of philosophy,
of doctrinal theses completely at odds with my own inclinations, with
only the requirement that the authors are able to understand fairly
adequately some basic features of the kind of philosophy I myself feel
at home with; combination of seemingly incompatible interests and
behaviors, which makes for an increase of subcultures within industrial
states and might to some extent help future cultural diversity. So much
about "diversity!".

Secondly, I have a somewhat extreme appreciation of what Kant calls
beautiful actions (good actions based on inclination), in contrast to
dutiful ones. The choice of the formulation "Self-realization!" is in
part motivated by the belief that maturity in humans can be measured
along a scale from selfishness to Selfishness, that is, broadening and
deepening the self, rather than measures of dutiful altruism. I see
joyful sharing and caring as a natural process (which, I regret, is
somewhat retarded in myself.)

Thirdly, I believe that many-sided, high level Self-realization is more
easily reached through a "spartan" lifestyle than through the material
standard of average citizens of industrial states.

The simple formulations of the deep ecology platform and Ecosophy T are
not meant primarily to be used among philosophers, but in dialogues with
"the experts". When I wrote to them personally, asking whether they
accept the 8 points of the platform, many answered positively in
relation to most of or all points. And this includes top people in
ministries of oil and energy! But it is still an open question to what
extent they are willing to let their written answers be widely
published. It is also an open question to what extent they try to
influence their colleagues who use only shallow argumentation. The main
conclusion is moderately encouraging: there is a philosophy of the
man/nature relationship widely accepted among established experts
responsible for environmental decisions which requires a pervasive,
substantial change of present policies in favor of our "living" planet,
and not only for shortsighted human interests.

[1] Published in Philosophical Inquiry, 1986, Vol.VIII, No.1-2.

[2] The MS has been edited by Professor George Sessions

[3] For more about interspecific community relationships, see Arne
Naess, "Self-realization in Mixed Communities of Humans, Bears, Sheep
and Wolves", Inquiry 22, (1979): pp.321-341.

[4] Quotation from Section 13, "building support for conservation."

[5] I cannot here do justice to the many authors who have contributed to
the understanding of the emerging deep ecology movement. Only two will
be mentioned. the newsletters written by George Sessions, Dept. of
Philosophy, Sierra College, Rocklin, CA, are indispensible. there are
six letters, April 76, May 79, April 81, May 82, May 83, May 84 about
140 pages in all. The significant contributions by poets and artists are
fully recongized. Most of the materials are summarized by Sessions in
"Shallow and Deep Ecology: A Review of the Philosophical Literature", in
an excellent collection of articles, Ecological Consciousness, eds.
R.C.Schultz and J.D.Hughes (Washington: University Press of America,
1981). Bill Devall provides a short survey, in part historical, in his
potent article, "The Deep Ecology Movement", Natural Resources Journal
(1980). See also Devall and Sessions, Deep Ecology: Living As If Nature
Mattered. (Layton, Utah: Peregrine Smith Press, 1984).

[6] Tom Regan, "The Nature and Possibility of an Environmental Ethics",
Environmental Ethics 3, (1981): 19:34, citation on p.30.

[7] I proposed the name "Deep, Long-Range Ecology Movement" in a lecture
at the Third World Future Research Conference, Bucharest, September
1972. A summary of that lecture: "The Shallow and the Deep, Long-Range
Ecology Movement" was published in Inquiry 16, (1973): 95-100. Within
the deep ecology movement it is fairly common to use the term "deep
ecologist", whereas "shallow ecologist", I am glad to say, is rather
uncommon. Both terms may be considered arrogant and slightly misleading.
I prefer to use the awkward, but more egalitarian expression "supporter
of the deep (or shallow) ecology movement", avoiding personification.
Also, it is common to call deep ecology consistently
anti-anthropocentric. This has led to misconceptions, see my "A Defense
of the Deep Ecology Movement", Environmental Ethics 5 (1983).

[8] The technical term "biospheric" should perhaps be avoided because it
favors the scientifically fruitful distinction between biosphere and
ecosphere. I use the term "life" in a broad sense common in everyday
speech, and may therefore speak of landscapes and larger systems of the
ecosphere as "living" - ultimately speaking of life of the planet. The
biospheric point of view referred to in the text is not a narrower point
of view than the ecospheric because bios is used in a broad sense.

[9] World Conservation Strategy, section 13, concluding paragraph.

[10] Many authors take some steps towards derivational structures,
offering mild systemizations. The chapter on "environmental ethics and
hope" in G.Tyler Miller. Living in the Environmental, 3rd ed. (Belmont:
Wadsworth, 1983)) is a valuable start, but the derivational relations
are unclear. The logic and semantics of simple models of normative
systems is briefly discussed in my "Notes on the Methodology of
Normative Systems", Methodology and Science 10, (1977): 64:79. For
defense of the thesis that as soon as persons assert anything at all we
assume a total view, implicit with ontology, methodology, epistemology
and ethics, see my "Reflections about Total Views", Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 25 (1964-65):16-29. The best and wittiest
warning against taking systematizations too seriously is to be found in
Søren Kierkegaard, Concluding Unscientific Postscript.

[11] Trusting Bill Devall, one may say that "Muir is now understood as
the first Taoist of American ecology." Devall, "John Muir as Deep
Ecologist", Environmental Review 6(1982); see also Michael Cohen, The
Pathless Way: John Muir and American Wilderness, (Madison: Univ.of
Wisconsin Press, 1984).

[12] For empirical studies of attitudes of "Wilderness-users", see the
survey by Chris. R.Kent (16438 Clymer St., Granada Hills, CA91344) in
his thesis "The Experiential Process of Nature Mysticism..." Humboldt
State Univ., 1981.

[13] Living in the Environment, 489.

[14] The term atman is not taken in its absolutistic senses, not as a
permanent indestructible "doul". This makes it consistent with those
Buddhist denials (the atman doctrine) that the atman is to be taken in
absolutist senses. Within the Christian tradition some theologians
distinguish "ego" and "true self" in ways similar to these distinctions
in Eastern religion. See the ecosphilosophica interpretation of the
gospel of Luke in Stephen Verney's Oneto the New Age, (Glasgow: Collins
1976) 33-41.

[15] For criticism and defense of this fundamental norm, and my answer,
see In Sceptical Wonder, Essays in Honor of Arne Naess, (Oslo University
Press, 1982). My main exposition of Ecosophy T was originally offered in
the Norwegian work Økologi, Samfunn og Livsstil, (Oslo University Press,
5th ed., 1976). Even there, the exposition is sketchy.
