1986H

What is basic in Deep Ecology[1]

Arne Naess

The deep ecology movement will thrive whatever professional philosophers
like myself publish about their conception of it. Perhaps what I say
about it is expressed in a way that is not natural for many of its warm
supporters. But we cannot expect, or even wish, to have a single way of
expressing ourselves. I have mine.

Supporters of the deep ecology movement refer approvingly to a diversity
of philosophers, cultural traditions and religious trends. Some authors
ask for clarification: Where is the essence or core? Is there a definite
general philosophy of deep ecology, or at least a kind of philosophy? Or
is it essentially a movement with exasperatingly vague outlines?

I do not think it is desirable to do more than tentatively suggest what
might be the essential ingredients of a deep ecology theoretical point
of view. In what follows I make some remarks which are formulated in a
way that might be considered dogmatic. They are, however, only meant as
proposals for people with a background similar to my own.

In order to facilitate discussion about deep ecology among philosophers,
it may be helpful to distinguish a common platform of deep ecology from
the fundamental features of philosophies and religions from which that
platform is derived, provided it is tentatively formulated as a set of
norms and 'hypotheses' (factual assumptions). The term 'platform' is
preferred to 'principle' because the latter may be misunderstood to
refer to ultimate premises. Furthermore, the formulations of a platform
should be short and concise (as a synopsis), whereas the fundamental
premises are Buddhist, Taoist, Christian or of other religious kinds, or
they are philosophic with affinities to the basic views of Spinoza,
Whitehead, Heidegger, or others. Different sets of fundamentals are
normally more or less incompatible or at least difficult to compare in
terms of cognitive contents. Supporters of deep ecology may have great
difficulties in understanding each other's ultimate view, but not sets
of 'penultimate' ones as formulated as a kind of platform they have
largely in common.

The platform of the deep ecology movement is grounded in religion or
philosophy including ethics. It may also be said to be derived from
these fundaments. As used here the term 'derived' is open to a variety
of interpretations. If the validity of a norm or a hypothesis is
justified by reference to one definite set of assumptions of a
philosophical or religious kind, the norm or hypothesis is in a sense
derived from those assumptions. The set acquires a character of premises
for particular conclusions. But closely similar or even identical
conclusions may be drawn from divergent or even incompatible premises.
This explains in a natural way that diversity of views at the deepest
level by some are felt to be bewildering and making deep ecology too
vague to deserve analytical scrutiny.

One must avoid looking for one definite philosophy or religious view
among the supporters of the deep ecology movement. There is a rich
manifold of fundamental views compatible with the deep ecology platform.
And without this, the movement would lose its transcultural character.
The transcultural character of the movement makes it natural that the
wording of a version of the platform cannot be the same everywhere. A
term like 'our planet', for instance, is unsuitable where people do not
have any clear notion corresponding to the Western concept of a planet.

The discussion has four levels to take into account: verbalized
fundamental philosophical and religious views, the deep ecology
platform, the more or less general consequences derived from the
platform - guidelines for life styles and for policies of every kind.
Lastly, prescriptions related to concrete situations and dateable
decisions made in them. The term 'dateable' refers to the trivial
circumstance that a decision is made at a definite time even if it has
taken a year to arrive at.

From the point of view of derivation one may use the following diagram,
usually called the 'Apron' diagram. The direction of derivation proceeds
down the page, as is usual, and convenient. But some may prefer the
opposite: having the 'roots' on the deepest level at the bottom of the
page and letting the other levels develop like the branches of a tree.
Still others would prefer a more holistic or artistic illustration
avoiding straight lines, preferring circles. The 'root' may be conceived
in terms of the premise/conclusion relation or in terms of psychological
or social motivation, or in terms of some other relations. The Apron is
a premise/conclusion diagram.

The Apron Diagram

B P C I Fundamentals, Buddhist (B), Christian (C) and Christian (C) and
Philosophical (P) Ultimate premises (as examples)

_(Direction)

_(of)

_(Derivation) II Deep ecology platform

III Norms and hypotheses,

more or less general, in part derived from

the platform

IV Particular norms and

decisions related to

particular ecologic-

ally relevant situations

The 'Apron diagram' is of a rather abstract nature. Why not give an
example of a justification of a concrete action formulated in terms of
the apron? Let NN be a mythical person, a supporter of the deep ecology
movement, living somewhere near the unique old growth forests of the
North West United States of America. He happens to have fundamental
beliefs of a Spinozistic kind, but has no knowledge of Spinoza. One
early Monday he spikes some trees, puts up some posters clearly
announcing that trees in the neighborhood are spiked. I use NN as an
example of how he in principle, not in practice, makes use of the Apron
diagram. The concrete action of spiking is chosen because of its
controversial character. Some supporters do not find the spiking
procedure justifiable. Exactly where is the disagreements to be located?

Example

Level 1 A set of ultimate Spinozist premises

N & H N & H

Level 2 The 8 points

The logging at P Logging at P is Direct actions decreases richness
illegal should be non- & diversity & not violent

necessary to satisfy

vital needs

H N & H N

Treespiking,pro- All normal

perly done, is non- means to stop

violent and may it have been

contribute to stop tried but

logging have failed

Logging at P should H H

be stopped now

Level 3 Treespiking at P is Supporters of

justifiable & urgent d.e.m. living

near P and con-

sidering spik-

ing should part-

N & H cipate I,NN, satisfy the above conditions. N I could start Mon-

day

H

It is now Monday

Level 4

H

(NN:) Spike!

Abbreviations:

N - norm

H - hypothesis

d.e.m. - the deep ecology movement

N.N. - a person

In assessing constructive criticism of deep ecology it is useful to try
to find out which level is involved. An example: In the introduction to
his the Ethics of Environmental Concern, (Oxford: Blackwell 1983), Robin
Attfield says:

I do not accept, with the so-called 'deep, long-range ecology movement',
the view that our principal loyalty should be focussed not on
fellow-humans or fellow creatures but on the biosphere as an organic
whole,...

I suppose there are some supporters of the deep ecology movement who
propose focussing loyalty on the biosphere as an organic whole in the
sense suggested by Attfield. The conception of the biosphere as an
organic whole and of such a kind of loyalty belongs to the realm of
metaphysics, that is level one, rather than to there other levels.
Therefore that Attfield does not accept the view he describes is not
relevant in argumentation for or against deep ecology. You may or may
not have your principal loyalty focussed on the biosphere as an organic
whole, you cannot even be sure what is meant by the terms. One main
point in deep ecology is the 'deep' argumentation, that is,
argumentation from ultimate (philosophical, religious) premises, but
there is room for very different sets of such premises.

If the view outlined by Attfield seemed to be implicit in deep ecology
views on level 2, his non-acceptance would amount to a non-acceptance of
something basic in the deep ecology movement (in so far as it is
verbally articulated). If the view seemed to be implicit in views
belonging to level 3, this would also be relevant to acceptance of deep
ecology, and the same applies to level 4. Attfield could mean that, on
the whole, decisions made or advocated by supporters of deep ecology
seem to imply the view he does not accept. Perhaps, perhaps not.

Conclusion: distinction of levels is useful when trying to pin down
exactly what a criticism is focussing on.

The Apron Diagram furnishes only static model. A supporter of deep
ecology will normally modigy the sentences at the different levels from
time to time. New information may change any hypotheses and therefore
also change norms which in part have been justified on the basis of the
hypotheses being changed.

New ethical or other intuitions may make the supporter change any norm.
If a norm is changed, new sets of hypotheses are normally involved, and
old ones are discarded. This again will cause reverberations in a
smaller or greater part of the field.

Example: Diprinzio, supporter of the deep ecology movement, reads the
Canberra Times:

MELBOURNE: Victoria's mountain people brought their

own legend to Melbourne's streets today to show their anger about the
State Government's plan to extend the Alpine National Parks.

The Alpine families arrived with their dogs, their drays and their
stockwhips.

They rode in wagons or horseback wearing moleskins, bush hats and
oilskins.

They provided one of the most colourful protests Melbourne has seen and
were cheered by hordes of people lining the route to Parliament House.

The people of the high country say the Government's plan threatens to
destroy their heritage and the future of the 120 families who have been
grazing cattle in the Alps for the past 150 years.

The article and a most touching picture make this staunch supporter of
deep ecology exclaim, 'Yes, we cannot do this to the 120 families, the
plan must be fought, today! I join the demonstration!' His decision is
of a kind that belongs to level 4. But he soon realizes that it may go
against a lot of his own norms and hypotheses of level 2 and level 3.
The deep ecology platform clearly implies a 'No!' - if Diprinzio does
not start to make changes at level 3. He feels that his tentative Yes
might not touch the platform formulations if he makes proper changes of
level 3 hypotheses. So he sees what can be done at level 3. There he
finds hypotheses about compensation to people in similar awkward
situations as the mountain people. He also tries to clarify and assess
his position in general. After some reflection he reverses his
conclusion: The plan should be upheld, but he decides to study it more
carefully.

From a point of view of normative systematizations, what goes on when
changes are made at one or more levels is rather complicated. But part
of it is processes of derivation. The Apron Diagram pretends only to
illustrate important differences of the levels of derivation and the
specific character of level 2. It represents a condensed formulation of
the deepest-level norms and hypotheses which most supporters of the deep
ecology movement can agree upon. This level is illustrated as the
penultimate (next to ultimate) level of argumentation characteristic of
those supporters of deep ecology who try to articulate their very basic
views. At the third and fourth levels disagreements may arise. At the
first level supporters with entirely different backgrounds disagree, or
find each other's views more or less incomprehensible.

A 'direction of derivation' is not a measure of value priorities or of
ethical priorities. And it does not imply that what is derived is a
means in relation to what it is derived from. A simple example is enough
to clarify this. From 'Do not kill humans!', follows, if you concede
'All mothers are humans', the conclusion 'Do not kill your mother!'.
This rather concrete norm is here derived from the more general and
abstract one. But this does not imply that humans in general have a
higher value or a kind of priority in relation to mothers. It does not
say that in a norm conflict you should be more careful not to kill
humans than not to kill your mother. An absurd position! And lastly, it
is rather strange to refrain from killing your mother as a means to a
goal, namely not to kill humans.

The formulations of level 2 have the character of proposals. It may turn
out that proposals will differ substantially or show a natural diversity
of terminological and conceptual idiosyncracies. Unhappily, it is quite
common, in a broad sense, to mix the logical relation of derivation with
other relations. These are at least as important, but nevertheless are
different.

Rather often the relation of 'justification', ethical or otherwise,
coincides with the relation of derivation. Thus a general, more or less
intuitive norm of 'right to live and flourish' is adhered to by many
people without considering exactly what the norm, taken so-called
literally, has as consequences. Confronted with questions like 'What
about poisonous snakes?', 'What about beetles eating our vegetables?',
some will hesitate, but eventually take up a firm positive stand,
justifying this by reference to the general norm. In such cases, the
derivation relation coincides with the justification relation (for these
people). Schematically: generaly premise: 'There is a right which every
living being x has, in principle, to live and flourish'. Special
premise: 'y is a living being'. Conclusion: There is a right which y
has...'. The conclusion is ethically as well as syllogistically derived
from the general premise. In spite of the many cases of such
coincidences, the relations should be kept apart - by people interested
in philosophical articulation of deep ecology.

There is no point in trying to formulate a short (or long) version of
level 2 that all supporters of deep ecology would like. The most
remarkable similarities of positions and attitudes belong to levels 3
and 4. There are typical shallow and typical deep argumentation
patterns, and there are environmental policies and decisions in relation
to which supporters of deep ecology show an astonishingly high level of
agreement.

Here is, slightly modified, a proposal for level 2 published in
Ecophilosophy VI, May 1984, p.5:

(1) The flourishing of human and non-human life on Earth has inherent
value. The value of non-human life-forms is independent of the
usefulness of the non-human world for human

purposes.

(2) Richness and diversity of life forms are also values in themselves
and contribute to the flourishing of human and non-human life on Earth.

(3) Humans have no right to reduce this richness and diversity except to
satisfy vital needs.

(4) The flourishing of human life and cultures is compatiable with a
substantial decrease of the human population. The flourishing of
non-human life requires such a decrease.

(5) Present human interference with the non-human world is excessive,
and the situation is rapidly worsening.

(6) In view of the foregoing points, policies must be changed. The
changes in policies affect basic economic, technological, and
ideological structures. The resulting state of affairs will be deeply
different from the present and make possible a more joyful experience of
the connectedness of all things.

(7) The ideological change is mainly that of appreciating life quality
(dwelling in situations of inherent value) rather than adhering to an
increasingly higher standard of living. There will be a profound
awareness of the difference between big and great.

(8) Those who subscribe to the foregoing points have an obligation
directly or indirectly to participate in the attempt to implement the
necessary changes.

The 8 formulations are of course in need of clarification, elaboration,
and comments. Some are offered on pp.5-7 in Ecophilosophy VI. Here they
are, slightly modified:

RE (1) Instead of 'biosphere' we might use the term 'ecosphere' in order
to stress that we of course do not limit our concern to the life-forms
in a narrow sense. The term 'life' is used here in a comprehensive
non-technical way to refer also to what biologists classify as
non-living: rivers (watersheds), landscapes, cultures, ecosystems, 'the
living earth'. Slogans such as "Let the river live" illustrate the
broader usage so common in many different cultures. Only in our Western
schools the term 'living' is firmly associated with science of biology.

RE (2) So-called simple, lower, or primitive species of plants and
animals contribute essentially to richness and diversity of life. They
have value-in-themselves and are not merely steps towards the so-called
higher or rational life forms.

Complexity, as referred to here, is different from complication. Urban
life may be more complicated than life in a natural setting without
being more complex in the sense of multi-faceted quality.

Why talk about diversity AND richness? Suppose human interfere with an
ecosystem to such a degree that 1000 vertebrate species are each reduced
to a survival minimum. Clearly an unacceptable state of affairs. We
demand abundance, interconnected habits through 'bridges'. The main
point is that life on Earth may be excessively interfered with even if
diversity is upheld.

RE (3) This formulation is perhaps too strong. But considering the mass
of proclamations about what humans have the right to, it may be sobering
to announce a norm about what they have no right to. That is, take into
account situations in which they cannot evoke and appeal to a right. The
formulation is not intended to automatically condemn all actions to
which we cannot invoke a right as wrong.

The term "vital need" is left deliberately vague to allow for
considerable latitude in judgment. Differences in climate and related
factors, together with differences in the structures of societies as
they now exist, need to be considered. Also the difference between a
means to the satisfaction of the need and the need must be considered.
If a whaler quits whaling he may risk unemployment under the present
economic conditions. Whaling is for him an important means. But he and
his boat are urgently needed in the control of overfishing and the use
of barbarous methods. And the whaling nations are rich enough to finance
such inspection, especially along the coasts of Third World countries.
So there is not a question of vital need to kill whales.

RE (4) The stabilization and reduction of the human population will take
time. Interim strategies need to be developed. But this in no way
excuses the present complacency - the extreme seriousness of our current
situation must first be realized. But the longer we wait, the more
drastic will be the measures needed. Until deep changes are made,
substantial decreases in richness and diversity are liable to occur: the
rate of extinction of species will be ten to one hundred times greater
than in any other period of earth history.

It may validly be objected that if the present billions of humans deeply
change their behavior in the direction of ecological responsibility,
non-human life could flourish.

RE (5) People in the materially richest countries cannot be expected to
reduce their excessive interference with the non-human world to a
moderate level overnight. Less interference does not imply that humans
should not modify some ecosystems as do other species. Humans have
modified the earth and will probably continue to do so. At issue is the
nature and extent of such interference.

The fight to preserve and extend areas of wilderness or near-wilderness
should continue and focus on the general ecological functions of these
areas. Very large wilderness areas are required in the biosphere to
allow for continued evolutionary speciation of animals and plants.
Present designated wilderness areas are too small and too few.

RE (6) Economic growth as conceived and implemented today by the
industrial states is incompatible with (1) - (5). 'Green economists'
have to be consultet.

Whereas "self-determination", "decentralization", "local community", and
"think globally, act locally", will remain key terms in the ecology of
human societies, nevertheless the implementation of deep changes
requires increasingly global action in the sense of action across every
border. And it often turns out that local communities or areas with
scattered population are uncritically in favor of so-called development
and must be forced to a more ecological responsible policy by central
authorities. There are important limits to decentralization of
ecologically relevant decisions.

Support for global action through non-governmental organizations becomes
increasingly important. Many of these organizations are able to act
globally "from grass roots to grass roots", thus avoiding negative
government interference.

Cultural diversity today requires advanced technology, that is,
techniques that advance the basic goals of each culture. So-called soft,
intermediate, and alternative technologies are steps in this direction.
What is called 'advanced' technology rarely fits the name.

RE (7) Some economists criticize the term "quality of life" because it
is supposed to be vague. But on closer inspection, what they consider to
be vague is actually the non-quantitative nature of the term. One cannot
quantify adequately what is important for the quality of life as
discussed here, and there is no need to do so.

RE (8) There is ample room for different opinions about priorities: what
should be done first, what next? What is more urgent? What is necessary
as opposed to what is highly desirable? Differences of opinion do not
exclude vigorous cooperation. 'The frontier is long'.

What is gained from tentatively formulating basic views shared today by
most or all supporters of the deep ecology movement? Hopefully it makes
it a little easier to localize the movement among the many 'alternative'
movements. Hopefully this does not lead to isolation but rather to even
better cooperation with many other alternative movements. It might also
make some of us more clear about where we stand, and more clear about
which disagreements might profitably be reduced and which ones might
profitably be sharpened.

[1]     ^(?)Revised lecture in Canberra, Australia, 1986 (?).
