1987.N

Green Society and Deep Ecology[1]

Arne Naess

I.Introduction

In Norwegian schools in the 1920s we learnt a lot about the British
aristocracy, and by and large, favorable things. I feel still the
influence of this indoctrination. Arriving here as a guest of the
Schumacher Society I note with pleasure and amusement that I feel I face
the British aristocracy of 1987. I have never read anything about
E.C.Schumacher as a person, but his attitudes which at least seem to be
revealed in his writings, inevitably suggest that if anybody, then he,
belongs to the best, to the aristos of the Greeks. And as regards
'ruling' - the 'cracy' - part of the term 'aristocracy - I suppose we in
Norway did not think of the British aristocracy as people who rule and
coerce others. So, the same applies to you, I suppose.

But I have also a second strong feeling, namely that of being more or
less at the mercy of strong coercive forces ruining much of what we
value most. Nature, the Earth.[2] In Norway, we who are old, and what I
call supporters of the deep ecology movement, feel often the same as we
felt under the German occupation from 1940 to 1945, the main difference
being that while the occupiers during the war committed atrocities
against humans, the well-meaning, good-natured contemporary occupiers of
Norway commit atrocities against Norwegian nature and take part in the
general despoilment of life conditions of this most rare planet, Earth.
We are only tiny parts of the surface of the planet, but excessively
busy and mobile, and increasingly able to destroy. Only a few days ago a
local politician proposed that what he called useless hills just outside
our capital should be developed. It means cutting down the forest, and
deny access to free nature by foot, making the use of motorized
transportation still more necessary. The political gain is to be seen in
taxation. The development is a housing project of such a kind that only
very rich people can afford to live on those hills. You get an amount of
money taxing the rich which the poor trees on the hills cannot pay. The
slogan "The forest for the trees!" is not often heard among our kind and
well-meaning politicians.

The deep ecology movement has much to do with the emancipation of
apparently useless or inconvenient feelings. I shall therefore permit
myself to express a third feeling. I feel badly about making unfavorable
remarks concerning the treatment of free nature in my own country. When
lecturing abroad, let us say in Tasmania, the Australians want to say
after the lecture that Norway has better environmental policies than
they have. We all need encouragement, because policies of our own
country is discouraging. We need to feel that it is practicable to
change policies. Other countries have shown it is possible.

I shall end these loose introductory remarks by mentioning a Norwegian
tradition which we think is outstanding, the combined free air and
cottage life. Even in Arctic Norway where the timberline is only about
1000 feet above see level, and population is scattered, families like to
have a cottage where climate is still rougher than where they have their
work. The government has proclaimed that it is their goal that every
Norwegian family who wants it should have a cottage. I mention this
because the free air and cottage life-style exemplifies a life simple in
means and rich in goals, that is, to a certain degree, points towards a
lifestyle compatible with the requirements of a green society. It is
also a simplicity of means that is universalizable, that is, which the
planet can afford. It is sustainable. It exemplifies a high quality of
life combined with low material living standard.

But from now on I shall be more professional and systematic. The
realization of any society worthy of the name 'green society'
presupposes that policies characteristic of deep ecology are adopted.
But there are also other requirements that must be fulfilled. The
conceptual clarification of the deep ecology movement will, I hope,
contribute in a modest way to the realization of green societies,
furnishing an articulation of part of their fundaments.

But before discussing the role of the distinction between 'deep' and
'shallow' I shall briefly mention various conceptions of the content of
a green society.

II.The Vision of, and Transition towards, a Green Society

Those who use the term 'green society' for their vision of a future
good, or even a perfect society describe it in similar but of course not
in identical ways. They are, so far as I happen to know, all grown up in
industrial societies. This may influence in the direction of similarity
of visions. Let us expect with equanimity different visions of greenness
born in the developing countries.

Without visions we are in peril, but so we are without considering the
question of transition toward a green society, and also views as to what
may be considered concrete steps toward a greener society.

But first: what is a green society? I must limit myself to mention some
of the slogans and key terms describing it:

It is strongly decentralized, it is a grassroot democracy, there is
social responsibility, mutual aid, a reign of non-violence. People live
in voluntary simplicity, self-directed, with a high degree of
self-reliance and with moderate mobility. The generations live together,
to some extent work together. There is a feeling of community, local
communities are strong. Technology is appropriate, industrial and
agricultural units are small, home and place of work near each other,
transportation mainly public. There is an absence of social hierarchy,
absence of male domination, there is equality, classlessness.

So far not a single slogan of my list has referred to nature or to
ecology. But such slogans are at hand:

Respect for nature, reverence for life, ecological agriculture, absence
of monoculture forests, absence of animal factories, access to free
nature.

This at least brings us to what I see as what is specific about green
societies.

A green society in so far as it is inspired by the supporters of the
global deep ecology movement is characterized by its relation to nature
and natural process, to insights into the deep interrelations between
man and the environment and joyful acceptance of these interrelations,
not as one of dependence on something foreign or even hostile to
oneself. The self is basically ecological and the talk about man in an
environment basically misleading as a conceptuali-zation. Therefore the
slogans of green society, of course, include 'Earth First!', 'Man not
apart!', 'Friends of the Earth'. 'Ecological responsibility!', 'Hug the
Tree' (Chipko movement), 'The forest for the trees!' - that is,
basically a forest is an end in itself, something that need not serve
any narrow human purpose.

In these latter slogans the term 'society' is not used.

Inspecting the list of key terms and slogans we may put them in three
classes, those solely mentioning human society, those combining society
and nature or ecology, and those solely about nature or ecology.

Within some groups working for the realization of a green society the
first class is preponderant, within others the third. The groups are not
geographically evenly distributed. There is a slight, but interesting
difference between 'thinking green' in central and Mediterranean Europe
and thinking green in the marginal northern or southern lands -
Scandinavia, Great Britain, Canada, North West United States and
Australia.

The social greenness of the slogans of the central areas contrasts
vaguely with the natural greenness of the marginal.

There is sometimes a difference in underlaying assump-tions that roughly
may be characterized like this: the social greens say that wrong
attitudes towards nature reflect and are dependent on the wrong attitude
between people within societies. Domination, exploitation, lack of
respect coloring human relations in a society foster necessarily the
same attitues towards nature. Therefore, they say, the main task or the
first task is to change human societies. Satisfactory attitudes towards
nature will follow more or less automatically. The natural greens have
stronger belief in the direct approach, often neglecting political
activity or simply look at politics with horror. Anyhow, they believe
that attitudes and policies can be changed whatever the oppressive
character of society. That is, fighting for new policies is enganged
only in so far as the new policies within a society are considered
obviously necessary in order to change policies towards nature.

See figure below:

Published Views and Key Terms

Social Green

Supporters of the Deep Ecology Movement

Social,Spiritual & Nature

Spiritual Nature Green Green

It is very unfortunate that such differences in priorities or strategy
occasionally obscure agreement. It also fosters biased descriptions of
the views of each other. I stick to a slogan, a kind of 'Occam's razor':
stupiditas adversorum non est necessitatis augmentandum. That is, in
communication, the stupidity of one's opponent should not be increased
beyond necessity. If the opponent seems to say something stupid, one
should not choose an interpretation of his words which makes it attain
an unnecessary wild degree of stupidity. For me Gandhian non-violence +
a theorem in Spinoza's Ethics imply certain forms of communication. The
evil or merely stupid enemy is simply not perceived clearly. Spinoza
says that knowledge of the evil is never clear knowledge. I cannot quite
swallow this but Spinoza has a point that deserves consideration.

Clearly there is a far-reaching influence of interrelation between
humans in a society and the sort of dominant attitude towards nature.
But because of the urgency, for instance in matters of acid rain or the
destruction of rain forests, one has to try to change certain limited
policies immediately, whatever the present status of the societies
implicated in the cast destructions. Greater and deeper long range
changes are impossible to realize without changing the interrelations of
humans within a society and also the interrelations between societies.
The point of view of the social greens is of crucial importance.

In order to understand the complicated landscape of discussions now
going on and determining the trend of ecology movements in the 1990's, I
propose we make some distinctions:

The concept of:

a) Green society as a general utopia or vision of a perfect society.

b) Green society as a part of an utopia, focusing on man/nature
relations.

Some quoted slogans such as 'classlessness' and 'equality' suggest that
the user has a complete utopia in mind.

c) Greening of society as a blueprint of major transitions towards
greener society.

d) Green party programs - formulation of so-called 'fundamentalist' or
'realist' green political party programs.

e) Steps towards greener society as designations of views about
priorities in lessening the pressure on nature and planning steps
towards a green society.

The so-called realist conception of a green party accepts that tactical
considerations are esential part of the everyday political life, and a
party has to adapt itself to some extent to the ways of the established
order, however 'disgusting'.

Personally I think each country must find its own way of tackling the
intriguing questions of green parties. What I ask for is a certain
amount of serenity and philosophical calm in debating the various
alternatives.

Let me briefly make four points about the subject of e), steps in the
green direction.

(a) Everybody, whatever their age or occupation, can contribute
significantly towards the greening of society. The transition is to a
unique degree dependent upon the grassroots and upon their loose
organizations or centers of mutual aid. The slogan 'The frontier is
long!' is important: many people are passive because they only know of
places along the frontier which do not suit or attract them.

(b) One aspect of non-violent revolution is to act as much as possible
as if the revolution already had taken place. That means in our
situation to act if we already lived in a green society. It implies for
instance to create a way of life which maximally satisfies green society
norms. It requires, however, a lot of self-respect and also a
willingness and capacity to select friends and partners which have
similar ideals. Furthermore, it requires a mixture of tolerance of
inconsistencies with some degree of self-discipline.

In a survey I have listed 25 lifestyle tendencies characteristics of
green susceptibilities. An organization which has helped thousands to
find friends and companions with such green lifestyle is called 'Future
In Our Hands'.

In the camp of social ecology the attempts to develop an ecologically
responsible individual lifestyle was often condemned as a privatization
of political problems. The influence by personal example was belittled.
The frontier is long and the private sector a part of the frontier.

(c) In the early 1970s the public in Scandinavia was more sensitive
towards violation of green rules then today. If invited to give a talk
far away so that the use of the unecological flight through air was
inevitable, I would mention that as an argument against inviting me.
More important: I would remind them of the norm to use local capacities,
and if they in the case at hand did not have any, to propose that they
develop local resources. Today there is unfortunately more despair in
the air. People feel more helpless and quite wrongly suppose their
private life is of zero influence.

(d) The 10 years from 1965 to 1975 witnessed a unique creativity of
green social and political thinking. The next 10 years brought some new
ideas, but also a number of corrections of older ones.

An axample: in the uniquely creative years it was generally assumed that
the stream of unecological policies would dry out if local communities
or districts got more power. This was one of the pillars of the
decentralization campaign. It has been a great disappointment to see how
local, and district opinion often have favored unecological projects
which give short-term profit and employment. Central institutions have
sometimes been strong enough to stop such projects, but in countries
with an old tradition of decentralization this is rarely the case. It
seems often that a major destruction of free nature only can be avoided
by strong central action and compensation for the locals.

Today appeal to globalization must to a certain extent supercede the
appeal to decentralization.

What holds of the slogan 'decentralization' holds good of a number other
slogans of the early 70s. We need a fresh look preparing ourselves for
the foreseeable gigantic conflicts in the 90s between the economic and
military growth forces and the save and replenish the Earth forces.

If there is a slogan of the early 70s which I should recomment most
intensely, it would be 'docta ignorantia'. As ecologists and field
conservationists tell us: we know less today than ever about the long
range consequences of our gigantic interference in natural processes.
"We know we don't know, therefore minimize interference".

III. Motivation for introducing the deep/shallow distinction

In the late 1960s European youth made an effort to go against the
established order, but heated debates on points of doctrine consumed an
inordinate amount of time and attention. At one time in Paris there were
listed 205 Marxist and Mao Tze Tung conflicting groups. In itself a
plurality may be judged positively, but lack of non-violence in
communication destroyed the value of diversity. Me or you, rather than
me and you, characterized the debate.

The introduction of the distinction 'deep' vs. 'shallow' international
ecological movement in the first years of the 70s was largely motivated
by the aim to avoid similar unkind atmosphere. Mutual aid and
encouragement is crucial when we see a terrible destruction going on and
sometimes feel helpless to avoid its indefinite continuation.

It is natural for some of us in a tentative way to articulate common
points of view within the movement. I take it as a trivival and not at
all threatening fact that different ecologically engaged groups like
different sets of slogans and key terms. Some like the slogan 'Think
like a mountain!', others cannot quite understand it. And we do not have
time and energy to find out about everybody's backgroud.

Actually a remarkable unity in diversity revealed itself in the 70s.
Whether one takes part in an environmental conflict in the high Arctic
of Norway or in the forest of Tasmania, similar slogans, attitudes, and
non-violent means are recognized. Even in social and political
theorizing there are clear lines of convergence. But here we who support
what I call the 'deep' ecology movement must of course be careful to
tread lightly, like in the fields. In Germany, for instance, a strongly
emotional debate evolved around whether a green party should have total
elimination of experiments with animals should be part of the program.
As an old analytically inclined philosopher and semanticist I think
people with different value priorities, different experiences with
animals, may come together and try out different formulations of
opposition to the despicable present day misuse of animals without
formulating a total rejection of animal experimentation in a wide sense
of the word experimentation. After all some experiments are done in
order to fight animal diseases for the sake of animals.

In short, I think that careful use of language, full use of the
guidelines of mutual aid, and abstinence from a too detailed and
dogmatically formulated program can guarantee large scale cooperation in
the 1990s even in sensitive social and political areas.

So much about the motivation of introducing a distinction deep/shallow.
Others, for instance, J.Rodman, have introduced similar distinctions.[3]

But before describing what I tentatively have taken to be fundamental
and characteristic of a deep ecology movement, I shall, for the benefit
of those who have never heard about the terminology of 'deep' and
'shallow' suggest in three sentences what it is all about. The
supporters of the shallow movement accept 'business as usual' but admit
the necessity of taking pollution, resource depletion and population
increases in the poor countries more seriously. The supporters of the
deep movement feel that there must be a significant change in human
attitudes affecting all sides of human life, from individual lifestyle
to global political institutions. And it has to do with what we
experience as reality, how we conceive the world, our total view or what
the Germans have called somewhat grandly our Lebens- und Weltanschauun.

Using about 150-200 words, George Sessions and I articulated what I term
a tentative platform for the deep ecology movement in 8 points. It is
only a proposal and of course I appreciate other proposals. What I
expect is that different articulations will manifest common features as
to meaning, but different emphases and different terminological
idiosyncrasies.

Here are the 150 words I prefer today:

1. The welfare and flourishing of human and non-human living beings has
value in itself. The value of the non-human beings is independent of
their usefulness to hunans.

2. Richness and diversity of living beings has value in itself.

3. Humans have no right to reduce this richness and diversity except to
satisfy vital human needs.

4. The flourishing of human life and cultures is compatible with a
substantial decrease of the human population. The flourishing of
non-human life requires such a decrease.

5. Present human interference with the non-human world is excessive, and
the situation is rapidly worsening.

6. Policies must therefore be changed. These policies affect basic
economic, technological, and ideological structures. The resulting state
of affairs will be deeply different

from the present.

7. The appreciation of a high quality of life will supercede that of a
high standard of living.

8. Those who accept the foregoing points have an obligation to try to
contribute directly or indiretly to the implementation of necessary
changes.

IV. The Four Levels

What is the ultimate basis for the high valuation of nature, the Earth,
landscapes, mountains, richness and diversity of animals and plants? Is
there a valuation independent of use-value? Not only do philosophers
give answer to this, but they naturally show variations.

It is characteristic of the deep ecology movement that supporters have a
total engagement, including an ultimate philosophical or religious
stand. But they work together as supporters without having the same
ultimate views. This has confused many people: how can the supporters
cooperate and stand together in conflicts when they have different
ultimate views? The answer is trivial: to be a supporter it is, as I see
it, a requirement of a total view which includes, of course the
ultimates, but not a requirement of a definite, particular ultimate
stand. The most general views, considering the content, which they have
in common or nearly in common, may be placed on a less fundamental
level. That is the level I propose to call level 2. It may mislead to
call this level "the basic principles of deep ecology" - as it is
sometimes done. Its premises make up level 1, and as deepest premises we
find the ultimate stand.

In the platform formulated by Sessions and myself, two of its 8 points
are axiological. They talk about intrinsic value of all living beings
and of richness and diversity of life. If these two points are labelled
"basic principles" it may lead to the neglect of level 1 which furnishes
premises for level 2. In a sense level 1 is more basic, and from a
philosophical point of view ontology 'precedes' axiology. Perhaps we may
find, and formulate, something supporters of deep ecology have in common
which is ontological - saying something about how the world or reality
is experienced. The movement may be said to 'help us see and feel
ourselves intimately interrelated to nature in such a way that when we
harm nature we harm ourselves', paraphrasing Patsy Hallen.[4]
Elaborating, we may then assert that we harm nature when we harm a life
form, and when we reduce richness and diversity of nature. The rest of
the 8 points do not refer to value, and so we may seemingly avoid
axiology all together.

With level 2 (together with other premises) a great variety of
consequences follow. They may be said to form level 1. But there is an
essential level 4: concrete decisions in particular situations,
decisions based upon the views articulated on the first three levels.

The non-axiological way of formulating a platform of the deep ecology
movement is only one among many possibilities. They are worth looking
into. In the meantime I stick to the Session-Naess formulation. Its two
axiological points reflect a very common view among deep ecology
supporters. Their reaction against the monomaniac, narrow use-value and
resource-value focus of the shallow or reform movement is intense and
characteristic. Thus the reference at level 2 to intrinsic value as
opposed to narrow use-value is not arbitrary. In any case, a platform
formulation must reflect the all-important total engagement of the
supporters. This implies 'level 1' views. The reform or shallow movement
typically argues in terms of short term social and political goals or in
terms of human, and only human health. It is the responsibility of
supporters of deep ecology to hold together all levels, from the
ultimate premises to decisions in particular, concrete situations.

The Charter for Nature adopted in 1982 uses the following formulation
part of which is closely similar to point 1 of the platform:

"Every form of life is unique, warranting respect regardless of its
worth to man, and to accord other organisms such recognition, man must
be guided by a moral code of action."

The 'richness' referred to in point 2 is very strongly and ably
expressed by insisting that the population and habitat of all life forms
shall be safeguarded for their survival.

It is of importance that the work to formulate "World Charter for
Nature" was sponsored by the government of 34 'developing' countries.
(For details see the Ecology Law Quarterly, 12, pp.977-996. The General
Assembly voted in favor of the Charter by a vote of 111 to 1. The United
States of America cast the sole dissenting vote.)

A small remark on the term "worth to man": I prefer "narrow usefulness"
and similar expressions because all-sided maturity of humans comprises a
deep-seated need to protect life forms, even in a broad sense of the
term. This testifies to their worth to man. People who are asked "Do you
think we should protect those kinds of plants and animals which are not
useful?" often answer "But all of them are useful!", or give closely
similar answers. They are useful for a whole of which we are parts in
such a way that their protection is our protection.

V. Identification

Solidarity, compassion, fellow-feeling presupposes a kind of
identification and the lack of a kind of alienation. The identification
I talk about does not depend upon similiarity. You spontaneously see a
flower as radiant, joyful, healthy or sick, feeble, stunted, unhappy,
dying. Hundreds of other adjectives could be added. The main point is
that the spontaneous experience of a piece of reality which embraces
what may be articulated as inherent or intrinsic value. But the degree
and intensity normally has limits that can be observed in its
consequences. One morning the flower is thrown into the garbage can, not
even back into its soil. You ask why and get for instance the answer "It
withered. Not beautiful any longer."

In many cultures there are testimonies of identification processes
involving mountains. In the Bhagavadgita you hear about the daughter of
the missing, unhappy king Nala looking for her father among the mighty
mountains of the Himalayas. She asks the most majestic where she can
find her father. Here are some of the many adjectives she uses in
communicating with the mountain: in German, Gipfelgesehmückt,
himmelan-entrückt, erhöhte Warte grosse Standarte, seliger, lustauender,
Weltbauslützer, Ununterjochter, Umschauender weit und breit, höchste der
Erdenvesten. - Not easy to translate!

Another experience: a few years ago I literally met a wild fox in the
high mountains very near my cottage. Before inspecting me, the fox was
listening, its head practically touching the ground and looking exactly
like the dog we know from illustrating his 'his master's voice'. Foxes
are able to hear lemmings and mice crawling underground! Of course I
expected that when it saw me, the fox would run away. But it approached
to about 15 feet, looking into my eyes. "A young stupid fox!" the very
professional ecologist Ivar Mysterud said when he heard this. He was of
course right, humans are dangerous and unpredictable. But he missed the
point of the story. The greatness of this meeting with a wild and free
fox was for me due to an insight. I saw the fox as a perfectly sovereign
being like myself, inhabiting the mountains with the right of belonging
firmer than my own. The meeting elucidated the total nonsense of
proclaiming that the resources of the planet do not belong only to us
but to the future generations of humans. What about the future of the
fox (if it were not shot by somebody, just for fun?) Whether you say
that the Earth belongs to the race of white people or to people in
general, or to your children, it sounds the same to me. Atrocious! In
addition, the meeting with the fox also elucidated the deep ecology
slogan that we have no right to interfere in the ecosphere except to
satisfy our vital needs. Colleagues say that the term 'right' is
extremely controversial in philosophy and law and therefore should be
avoided. Children all year round use the phrase 'You don't have the
right to do so and so!' Their way of using it manifests a sufficiently
clear meaning for use in a slogan.

The undisturbed areas for foxes and even insects, like the artistic
flower-flies (syrphidae), diminish daily, and the question also arises:
are the fundamental goals of mature humans such that we have to sprawl
all over the globe?

The process of identification is a process in or of living beings, a
capacity culminating in a wonderful way among humans. (We are certainly
very special beings!) The study of the process of identification is one
of psychology and social sciences, including the now central cultural
anthropology. But a perfected (entirely carried out) process of
identification results in the awareness of a sort of identity. What
status has this sort of identity, how wide and deep is the identity as
feature of the all-emcompassing reality? In short, what is the
ontological status of an accomplished act of identification? The
one-word answer must be: an identity - as a part or feature of reality
itself. The answer brings us from psychology, and other sciences defined
through isolation of certain structures, to ontology as science of being
(onta).

I do not always know which words to use for the identities. In general
the one-ness may be expressed by, saying, for instance, 'ultimately
(essentially) all living beings are one'. "I believe in the essential
unity of man and for that matter all that lives." (Gandhi[5]) From the
point of view of philosophy I am not satisfied with such sentences, but
am sure that what they refer to is a feature of reality that it is
difficult, but not impossible, I believe, to express more clearly. What
I like to get through is the view that to the accomplished
psychologically describable acts of identification there are ontological
correlates.

VI. Anthropocentric vs. biocentric

The value of opposing to general attitudes within ecological movement,
the anthropocentric and the biocentric is, as every contrasting,
limited.

The focussing of man's relation to other beings again and again leads us
astray because the web of life is so different from radiations from a
single center or from mutually independent 'things'. Reality has the
character of a field, not of an inventory in space.

'an individual person at time t'

Me

Me fluctuating boundary

Thing-view Relational view

The lines of interdependence are only adequate studied and appreciated
from a biocentric view, or more generally, ecocentric.

As long as humans are considered the only source of value, the only
intrinsically valuable, there is little hope of ever reaching a
harmonious man/nature relations.

But some supporters of the deep ecology movement admit, without
blushing, that basically they are concerned about human survival and
human well-being. That need not be anthropocentric in any 'bad' way,
because as I see it, human well-being will in the long run depend on the
well-being of the Earth, replenishing of the Earth. Maturity will
inevitably make it a strong human need to live in harmony with life in
general. The question of how much we can destroy without disturbing the
life quality of humans cannot be accepted as relevant. Those who so far
have posed the question underestimate how much is already being
destroyed and overestimate how much may be destroyed without threatening
human welfare. Welfare in a green society does not depend upon the level
of interference hitting perceivable natural beings, but changing
ecosystems - the complex subfields of reality. Unfortunately the feeling
for such systems does not develop easily. But there is no fixed limit
for human development when heart and brain cooperate.

List of lifestyle trends within the deep ecology movement

(1) Use of simple means, avoidance of unncessary complicated instruments
and other sorts of means.

(2) Choice of activities most directly serving values in themselves and
having intrinsic value. Avoidance of activities which are merely
auxiliary, having no intrinsic value, or being many states away from
fundamental goals.

(3) Anti-consumerism. This negative attitude follows from (1) and (2).

(4) Endeavour to maintain and increase the sensitivity and appreciation
of goods of which there is enough for all to enjoy.

(5) Ansence or low degree of novophii - the love of what is new merely
because it is new.

(6) Effort to dwell in situations of intrinsic value and to act rather
than being busy.

(7) Appreciation of ethnic and cultural differences among people, not
feeling them as threats.

(8) Concern about the situation of the Third and the Fourth Worlds and
attempt to avoid a standard of living too much different from and higher
than the needy. (Global solidarity of lifestyle.)

(9) Appreciation of lifestyles which are universalizable, which are not
blatantly impossible to sustain without injustice toward fellow humans
or other species.

(10)To go for depth and richness of experience rather than intensity.

(11)To appreciate and choose, when possible, meaningful work rather than
just making a living.

(12)To lead a complex, not a complicated life, trying to realize as many
aspects of positive experiences as possible within each time-interval.

(13)Cultivating life in community (Gemeinschaft) rather than in society
(Gesellschaft).

(14)Appreciation of, or participation in, primary production - small
scale agriculture, forestry, fishing.

(15)Effort to satisfy vital needs rather than desires.

(16)Attempts to live in nature rather than just visiting beautiful
places, avoidance of tourism (but occasionally making use of tourist
facilities.

(17)When in vulnerable nature live 'light and traceless'.

(18)Tendency to appreciate all life-forms rather than merely those
considered beautiful, remarkable or narrowly useful.

(19)Never use life forms merely as means. Remain conscious of their
intrinsic value and dignity even when using them as resources.

(20)When there is a conflict between interests of dogs and cats (and
other pet animals) and wild species, a tendency to protect the latter.

(21)Efforts to protect local ecosystems, not only individual life forms,
feeling one's own community as part of ecosystems.

(22)Not only to deplore the excessive interference in nature as
unnecessary, unreasonable and disrespectful, but to condemn it as
insolent, atrocious, outrageous and criminal - without condemning the
people responsible for the interference.

(23)Try to act resolute and without cowardice in conflicts, but to
remain non-violent in words and deeds.

(24)Take part in or support non-violent direct action when other ways of
action fail.

(25)Vegetarianism.

[1]     ^(?)Lecture at Schumacher Society, 1987. Draft.

[2]     ^(?)Your Newsletter says:"Jonathan (Porritt) has made a
tremendous impact on the nations's thinking." Congratulations! But not a
great enough impact, I suppose?

[3]     ^(?)John Rodman, "Four Forms of Ecological Consciousness
reconsidered", in D.Scherer and T.Attig, eds., Ethics and the
Environment, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1983. - Excellent!

[4]     ^(?)"Making Peace with Nature: Why Ecology needs Feminism", The
Trumpeter, 4, No.3, 1987, p.3

[5]     ^(?)Young India, 4.12.1924.
