1988.AC

Cultural diversity and the deep ecology movement

Arne Naess

The new cultural anthropology

Cultural anthropology and the general history of the main families of
cultures on Earth reveal vast differences of attitudes, beliefs,
assumptions and premisses of individual, social, political and
metaphysical patterns.[1] How deep, or basic are these differences? That
is an open question. Inevitably, tentative answers require that we also
answer questions about what is precisely meant by 'deepness' in this
context.

Since the 40s there have been theories about the future of humankind
emphasizing the need for continued richness and diversity of human
cultures in order to avoid stagnation of human development. Development
in terms of biological evo-lution may take thousands or even millions of
years, but the extreme flexibility of humans may ensure development

through deep cultural changes rather than manifest biological
divergence. But such changes may in part depend upon sheer plurality of
cultural differences, whatever their deepness.[2]

Plurality requires moderation of the contemporary rapid cultural
invasion of other cultures, a process we have seen accelerating in this
century. The efforts of moderation I look upon as part of the general
effort to maintain richness and diversity of life on Earth. At least in
some easily observable ways there is a convergence of cultures rather
than diversifi-cation. Here we have, however, to take into account the
pre-sent diversification of subcultures - rapidly changing groups of
people trying out 'new' ways of life in conscious opposit-ion to the
'normal' within a particular culture.

From the very start of the deep ecology movement in the industrial
societies, the obvious question was raised: Are there or have there been
cultures with a more ecologically responsible relation between humans
and the non-human world than that of the present materially rich
national cultures? In USA various North American Indian cultures were
studied with special care and furnished a clear answer: Yes. At the same
time Europeans with a critical attitude towards indus-trial societies
started with renewed interest to study African cultures. Did they really
work harder, had they really less time and opportunity for cultural
achievements independent of those serving mere survival? Marhsall
Sahlins answered No. His main work appeared in English under the title
Stone Age Economics - an excellent kind of economics, in his opinion,
the most affluent stone age societies which supported their rich
cultures.

A new generation of cultural anthropologists grew up in the 60s with
rather ambivalent feelings towards the basic politics of industrial
societies. New versions favored new concepts such as those of 'the
post-industrial society', 'the green society', and a new conception
about 'development': the distinction underdeveloped/developed nations
was largely given up as a near synonym for poor non-industrial versus
rich industrial nations. The basic question was raised: How can the poor
nations get rid of the kind of poverty which has negative influence on
life quality - not of every kind of poverty as seen from the point of
view of a rich consumerist society. How can they develop without
following the tracks of the rich Western nations?

From the point of view of the deep ecology movement, these new vistas
were of prime importance. If the majority of humans tried to live the
same way as the average person in the rich industrial societies, the
doomsday prophesies might come true. When we appreciate a manifest
cultural difference, do we react in a same way as when we appreciate a
difference between differences of plants or of animals? We do not look
upon humans as animals in a zoological garden.

People active in the various sciences of life may easily go too far in
finding similarities between phenomena in human societies and those in
the animal and vegetable world. One has to be clear about the many
pitfalls. In the history of ideas the important line of ideas from
Protestantism through Hegel, Marx to the Frankfurter School has
contributed to the acute awareness of this tendency. On the other hand
there is also a kind of spiritual arrogance which may hide important
analogies and counteract the process of identification with living
beings other than fellow humans. In the worst concentration camps of
this century the conscious efforts of tyrants to educate guards in
brutality have mainly consisted in teaching them to look upon inmates as
animals. "They are only animals!" Brutes should be handled with
brutality - they don't under-stand decency. One must expect that a
putting together of human cultural diversity with non-human diversity
will some-times elicit deepseated repugnance.

The recent in part rather confusing debate over Wilson's sociobiology
illustrates both tendencies, exaggerating simil-arities or letting
repugnance take over.

Julian Huxley, the biologist and leader of UNESCO in the late 40s, and
many others at that time, worked out the hypo-thesis that in the very
long run, cultural diversity and cultural 'evolution' will play an
analogous role for the species of homo sapiens as mutations and species
variation among non-humans. It has been thought to result in a
develop-ment much faster than real speciation among mon-humans. This is
made possible through the extremely loose programming of humans: their
options in life are more varied, 'instinctive' determinants are less
dominating even if very strong. The term 'analogous' is used rather than
'similar' because some differ-ences are deep and important.

Deepness of cultural differences

If we subsume human cultural diversity under the concept of intrinsic
valuable diversity of life forms, the adjective 'deep' is appropriate.
Differences in details are not often important. If people in culture A
must put something on their heads when entering a church, whereas people
in culture B must take care not to wear anything there, the difference
in behavior is not deep. The attitude towards a church may be

very much alike.

What we are mostly concerned about today is continued existence of deep
cultural differences, not only small

variations of mores and habits.

From the point of view of the science of cultural anthropology the
criteria of deep versus shallow cannot be precise, but the literature of
that science shows clearly the important presence of a distinction
deep/shallow or, rather, deep/less deep, big/small,
essential/non-essential. Classifi-cations of cultures into groups attest
to such discrimina-tions.

[1] ^(    ?)There is an unfortunate confusion of terminology
sur-rounding the term 'cultural anthropology'. In Continental Europe
what in this article is called 'cultural anthropology' is mostly called
'ethnology' and in Great Britain 'social anthropology'. In Europe the
term 'ethnography' is sometimes used about subject matters clearly
falling under the American usage of 'cultural anthropology'. Its antonym
is 'physical anthropology'. - In Continental Europe the term
'philosophical anthropology' covers many subjects of cultural
anthropology and also subjects of ecosophy in general, such as the
debate about essential differences between humans and animals.
G.P.Gusdorf furnishes an excellent survey of the terminolo-gical
developments until about 1970 in his article "Anthropo-logy" in
Encyclopedia Britannica, 15th Edition, Macropedia, Vol.1.

[2] ^(    ?)The distinction deep versus shallow cultural differnces and
the importance of articulated total views as expressions of the deep
differences, is elaborated in my What World is the real? (Hvilken verden
er den virkelige?), second edition, Oslo Universitetsforlaget, 1982. -
Cultural anthropology should, I think, be distinguished from less
comprehensive units of research: economic, technological, social, and
(the central European) philosophical anthropology. In my terminlogy, a
culture is the largest human unit and corresponds to a certain very
moderate degree to the unit of species in biology.

Before the 60s talks about cultures were considered unscientific within
certain scientific communities. Expressions such as 'the peoples of the
world' were favored. But 'the consumerism people' does not mean the same
as 'the consumerism culture'. Cp.R.W.Fox and T.H.Jackson Lears, The
Culture of Consumption, N.Y.:Pantheon Books, 1983.
