1989/13

Ecosophy and the Deep Ecology Movement

Beyond East and West

Interview by Richard Evanoff with Arne Naess

Richard Evanoff was active in the international Green movement, and also
the editor of Edge, a literary quarterly published in Japan when this
interview was done in 1989.

Norwegian philosopher Arne Naess is one of the pioneering figures of the
deep ecology movement, that grew out of the ‘60’s. Ecosophy T– an
ecological worldview first mapped out by Naess– provides an example of
his philosophical underpinnings for supporting the deep movement through
a holistic synthesis of spiritual, political, and environmental values
and perspectives.

The deep ecology movement has been part of, and influential in, the
various Green movements around the globe. Green parties in Japan have
been active for several years now and efforts are underway in the United
States to organize local Green groups, which are loosely federated in a
national organization and committed to “ten key values”: ecological
wisdom, grassroots democracy, personal and social responsibility,
non-violence, decentralization, community– based economics, post
patriarchal values, respect for diversity, global responsibility, and
future focus/sustainability.

Critical of the materialistic, bureaucratic, and increasingly unsound
environmental practices of both capitalism and socialism, the Green
vision allows scope for diversity of personal initiative, freedom, and
spirituality, while striving to foster responsible, non-hierarchical
relationships between people economically, socially and politically. The
Green emphasis on open discussion and respect for individual opinions
has generated much debate and has allowed people from left to right on
the political spectrum to forge new and sometimes unexpected alliances.

One debate has been between supporters of the deep ecology movement, as
exemplified by Naess, and supporters of social ecology, whose most
articulate spokesperson had been the social philosopher Murray Bookchin.
The debate involves whether top priority should be placed on
environmental problems or on issues of social justice which will lead
the movement back to an “anthropocentric” worldview. Social ecologists
fear that a “biocentric” outlook could result in a misanthropic attitude
toward humans. As the interview shows, Naess sees both sides as having
important contributions to make to the ecology movement as a whole- if
extremes can be avoided.

This interview was conducted at a Buddhist temple in Enoshima in the
spring of 1989, toward the end of Naess’s trip to Japan. His visit
included a stop at the Shiraho coral reef in Ishigaki, and numerous
discussions with scientists, environmentalists and political groups in
Japan.

Richard Evanoff: You’ve been credited with having coined the expression
“deep ecology.” How exactly did the idea originate?

Arne Naess: Well, I did not coin the term “deep ecology.” I coined two
terms. One is “supporter of the deep ecology movement”– a fairly long
expression. And the other is “ecosophy”. But this term “supporter of the
deep ecology movement” was very soon abbreviated to “deep ecology” and
supporters were called “deep ecologists.” [Note: Naess prefers not to
use the term “deep ecologist,” which he regards as immodest. He
considers “shallow ecologist” demeaning. We should strive for nonviolent
and mutually respectful communication even with those with whom we
disagree.]

How does “deep” ecology differ from “shallow” ecology?

Movements are always changing and one should be cautious in saying what
strictly separates two movements, like the deep and the shallow. One
marked difference is that the total argumentations of those who support
the shallow movement are anthropocentric, in the sense that everything
done to protect and restore nature is seen as having benefit for future
human generations. In the deep ecology movement, future generations
means future generations of all living beings, including rivers for
example.

Japanese are often thought of in the West and sometimes by Japanese
themselves as seeking “harmony with nature.” Now that you’ve seen a bit
of Japan, how do you feel about this characterization?

My trip to Japan has been organized so as to focus on some of the worst
things happening here, and I must say I am deeply depressed about what’s
going on in many ways. Companies have been allowed to destroy so much
nature without interference. At Ishigaki, 200 companies on a tiny island
are digging, making a great number of dams, and letting the soil
disappear to sea. So I’ve seen many things that are depressing in Japan
at the moment. But I’m confident that in the long run, there will be a
strong reaction against this kind of development.

Many Westerners have picked up on the idea which they identify with the
Orient, of the “oneness” of humankind with nature. How does this
“oneness” relate to the diversity which deep ecology emphasizes?

Well, you have in Buddhism and Taoism a lot of what they would call
nearness to nature and humbleness toward nature, so that you do not feel
superior, as kind of ubermensch. There is nothing in those traditions
where humans are looked upon as masters. But you have that also in
Western countries, not only in the Indian, Chinese and Japanese
cultures. You have wonderful expressions of nearness to nature (in the
West). The deep ecology movement has profited immensely from Buddhism,
Taoism, and Gandhism, and I hope that it will continue to do so. On the
other hand, in the West we are never going to be mainly Buddhist or
Taoist. We have to find roots in our own traditions. In the last couple
of years, we’ve had a revival of old Christian thinking, and not only
the St. Francis of Assisi movement, but earlier forms too. Within
Catholicism and the many groups of Christians there is now a saying that
we have sinned against the creation and that we must change society and
ourselves, our way of living– everything– in order to make good again
what we have sinned against.

You’ve written a lot about self-realization and the larger dimensions of
the self– seeing the self with respect to its relationships with others
and with the environment. Could you elaborate on that?

Well, in the first your of your life, and even more in the second year
of your life, you relate intimately to your parents, but also you relate
intimately to things you have around you– around your organism– such as
the home and the house, the grass and the animals. Your self, which you
tend to identify with your organism or with your ego, is already then
what I call an “ecological self,” which includes your parents, your kin,
your home, animals and other creatures nearby. This is different from
the tradition begun by Aristotle, namely to define humans as social
entities. That’s a great difference. It is also understandable, then,
that social scientists find it very difficult to cooperate with deep
ecology supporters. I feel this undermines the specificity of the social
point of view. So I introduce the term “ecological Self,” but the
concept and the thinking are in fact very old, as in Taoism for
instance.

What type of transformation of consciousness should be taking place in
the individual?

Transformation is going on in a way that’s very hard to trace. But to be
with people who are thinking and aware makes the consciousness of others
change. When a teacher takes a walk with his children, how he looks at
things and how he handles things has direct influence on the children.
And that changes their awareness. Whereas the way you handle things in
Biology class takes you even further away from life. Consciousness
cannot be handled, so to speak. You can handle your own behavior. And if
you start behaving differently, then your consciousness will also be
different. Eventually, it comes full circle and if your consciousness is
different, your behavior will also be different.

How do these transformations of consciousness translate into social
relationships? And from there how do they translate into something such
as the political reorganization of society?

As soon as you feel that you are not only a functionary or a specialist
in your life that you are also a total personality then you see that
total personalities have not only personal relations, but are also part
of a community and a society. There you are drawn into politics, or at
least you see the importance of people who are willing to do politics.
It must be admitted that most supporters of the deep ecology movement
don’t feel well in the political party business. But you cannot, either
today or in the future, eliminate the tactical and strategic thinking of
good politicians. So I never talk down about politicians. You get the
politicians you deserve.

Is there a tendency in the deep ecology movement to privatize
environmental problems, to see them as problems of individual
lifestyles?

Those individuals I call the “spirituals” tend to privatize and say you
must start with yourself. Of course for many people this is a good
slogan. But for many others it’s not a good slogan because you can go
around idolizing your own behavior without having as much influence as
you could if you also exposed yourself socially and politically. So I
think we cannot say such-and-such is politically the most important and
that the individual transforming himself is of no importance. You have
to see the aspects of life as individual, social, political and of
course global. They all go together. Your influence is local and global.

What types of changes of lifestyle might take place, though? For
example, how effective is it if I as an individual start using
biodegradable laundry soap when at the same time no effective restraints
are being put on multinational corporations to prevent them from
polluting the environment? Do the incremental changes I make in my own
personal lifestyle really have an influence?

Oh yes, it’s proven. For instance, those few people who were using
recycled paper they seemed a few years ago to have no effect. Then, all
of a sudden there was a change. For instance, in Norway all government
institutions are now going to be using recycled paper. And if the
government institutions are now going to be using recycled paper then
it’s not so difficult to increase the use of recycled paper everywhere
and to change national and international policies in relation to
forests. There may be a minority doing things more ecologically sound
and then suddenly the idea is grasped by a greater community.

There have been perhaps misconceptions of the meaning of deep ecology.
Some have said, for example, that deep ecology is a kind of mysticism
identifying humankind with nature.

That’s one misunderstanding and there are about five or six others due
to a complication in the concepts of deep ecology and ecosophy. I
distinguish different levels in human thinking and talk about the
ultimate premises in human thinking. Ultimate premises are either
philosophical or religious, or a combination. The supporters of the deep
ecology movement ultimately reason on the basis of these fundamentals.
But the fundamentals may be of very different kinds. From the radically
deepest premises, then, they derive a common strand, such as platform
principles, as supporters of the deep ecology movement. So the common
stand of the deep ecology supporters is not to be found in the ultimate
premises, but in the next-ultimate: the penultimate. In ultimate
premises you find various kinds of mysticism represented, one of which
is that individuals are, so to say, soaked up into the unity of nature
or the unity of the universe; there’s also mysticism where you retain a
concept of individuality. You could say, for instance, all living beings
are one ultimately there’s a oneness of all living beings.

About another misunderstanding: what is your feeling about those who
have used deep ecology to defend social Darwinism or Malthusianism? For
example, David Foreman of Earth First! has been quoted as saying with
regard to the Ethiopian famine, ”The best thing would be to just let
nature seek its own balance, to let the people there just starve.”

Dave Foreman sometimes seems to speak without much carefulness and
sometimes he’s then quoted even less carefully making these harsh
statements. The only thing I can find there which is a supportive view
is the opinion of many doctors who are trying to treat Ethiopian
starving children, when they say not publicly but when they say that
the best thing for many of these children would be to die. But of course
we cannot let them die. We have to, as physicians, try to heal them.
Also because of the parents, we cannot let children die. Dave Foremen
may have the opinion that it would be best for starving people to die,
but ecological humanitarian norms among humans are such that we are
extremely concerned about starvation. We have more responsibility toward
humans than we do toward animals. If someone had to chose between saving
a starving child, and the killing a starving rhinoceros, if there were
no other means of saving the child, he should kill the rhinoceros, and
we would all think that correct. But it would be a scandal, especially
among rich nations, not to help the poorer nations let living beings
continue to live. In short, we are not social Darwinists.

The expression “anthropocentric” is frequently heard. Would you define
deep ecology principles as being “biocentric” as opposed to
“anthropocentric”?

Yes, but I don’t like those Latinized words because it’s generally
supposed that they stand for very exact concepts, wheras they are mostly
more ambiguous and vague than ordinary language. To say biocentric could
of course be interpreted as saying that we have equal responsibility in
relation to flies and children, or some stupid kind of implication like
that. As soon as we use a difficult Latinized word, it’s possible for it
to be interpreted in an unfavorable way by those who are suspicious of
us. So I’ll stop using words like “biocentrric,” “anthropocentric,”
“biocentric egalitarianism,” and so on. I suppose we could speak of
“dualcentricism,” in the sense that our attention is not only toward
human beings, but all living beings, including such things as landscapes
and rivers, and that we consequently don’t like the distinction between
humans and the environment. We do not recognize that as a valid
distinction. We take the ecological view where you are in a network in
which you cannot single out anything, an interrelated network which is
intrinsic. You cannot isolate any of the points which are interrelating.

So using the words “biocentric” and “anthropocentric” would simply
perpetuate the dualistic, bifurcated point of view.

What I would say is that the distinctions between humans and the
environment tends to perpetuate this homocentric view, where you see
yourself inside something and then nature as outside yourself. Your self
is an ecological self. It’s not an isolated self that can look at
something outside of that self, namely the environment. So,
environmentalism is a bad word. It perpetuates the idea that the human
organism or human society can really be separated from the ecosystem.

Would deep ecology preclude concern for the issues of social justice,
that have become part of the agenda of left Greens?

No, I think that in the 20^(th) century we have three great grassroots
movements: that of social justice, that of peace, and that of the deep
ecology movement. Those three have to cooperate intimately. It’s quite
clear that the ecological crisis cannot be solved in isolation from
social justice for instance, to try to conserve rainforests without at
the same time taking up the tremendous problem of what to do with
relations between North and South. We have to take those problems all
of them at once, and not say that one is more important than the
others. So it’s extremely important that the social justice movement is
always taken into consideration. The peace movement is too obvious to
talk about at all. The military 900 billion dollars (1n 1988) used
every year for militarism is one of the greatest polluters in the
present day. Also any kind of warlike situation immediately tends to
negate every kind of concern not only for civilians but for all living
beings whatsoever. So those three movements must cooperate. What
distinguishes the deep ecology movement is that it is practically 100% a
grassroots movement, whereas the other two now have some support among
the governments.

In the March 1989 issue of Green Synthesis you mentioned there types of
individuals who are attracted to the international Green movement: the
“naturals,” who are most concerned with environmental issues and saving
the earth; the “spirituals,” who are interested in the implications for
self-realization; and the “socials,” who emphasize the issues related to
social justice. How can these various tendencies learn to work together
within the context of the organized Green movement?

By means of a lot of personal contact. Those who always speak as if they
were only concerned with one of these three core problems should not
look down upon or exclude the two others. Some people are so eager in
their own specialty that they practically never mention other issues
from what they themselves consider most important. There’s no reason to
say to them it’s not most important. There’s only reason to say, please
mention us others also, so that the public does not get the wrong
impression that there’s antagonism.

Is there antagonism?

I don’t think so. There are great differences of opinion, as there
should be in any living movement, but I don’t think we can talk about
real antagonisms. In the mass media, if any rude or violent words are
used, they will be quoted, whereas the media practically never quote the
clarifying discussions that are also going on. It isn’t “good” news. If
there’s no violence either verbal or, best of all, physical violence
the journalists don’t have much space for it. It’s easy for the public
to get the impression that there are antagonisms when actually there are
few.

You’ve mentioned frequently in your writings about people connected with
the Green movement having a lot of common ground. Do you feel the
so-called debate between deep ecology and social ecology, as represented
by Murray Bookchin, is a real debate involving real substantive issues
or is it simply contrived?

There are a great many people who associate themselves with the term
“social ecology.” Many of them have also published articles relating to
deep ecology, but they are writing in a way that’s not very interesting
for mass communication, whereas Murray Bookchin writes in an excellent
way to carry a message far out. So there’s no use, I think, to agree or
disagree with Murray Bookchin. There are also others associated with
social ecology who write in a way that is very fruitful and instructive
to the discussion. Personally, I have worked together with social
ecologists in South America whose specialty is ecological questions in
the poor countries of South America. You have to approach the population
in very different ways than the populations in rich countries. In the
rich countries all these questions of economic development have to be
combined with the question of solving the ecological crisis. We need
many social ecologists around to take up those problems in all their
seriousness.

There’s a Green slogan, “We are neither left nor right but straight
ahead.” The Green movement draws ideals from capitalism and from
socialism; how at the same time is it distinguished from both of those?
What’s the territory that the Green movement is carving out for itself,
so to speak?

From my point of view, supporters of the deep ecology movement have a
lot to learn both from the left and from the right in politics. From the
left it’s the most obvious: solidarity, compassion for the
underprivileged. But on the right, what we call the “blue” in Europe
(the blue, red and green there’s a triangle there)  from the blue I
learn very much about personal initiative. Not about private initiative
for one’s own gain, but personal initiative even in public institutions
such as universities. The right is also good at looking for ways of
simplifying organizations and organizational structures, simplifying
administration, simplifying bureaucracy.

How does that centralization/decentralization fit into this?

Well, in business, at some times and in some places it’s very important
to have small business and at other times and other places, big
business. But what is ecologically dangerous is, of course, to have
corporations that are much more powerful than Sweden or Norway are as
states, for instance. The corporations can then drag out their own
ecological policies much longer than a nation can. A mixture of a big
organization and government, as in Japan, must, I think, be the most
dangerous in all the world today.

There seems to be a renewed interest in anarchism as a political
philosophy. What connections do you see between anarchism and the Green
movement?

Personally, I am much inspired by Kropotkin and anarchist ideas in the
Gandhian movement. So I think this is a source of inspiration that will
continue. In the 1960’s and the beginning of the ‘70’s we had much more
optimism in anarchist thinking. Now we are so tremendously concerned
with global development that you must in your own community, whether
anarchist or other kind of local community, regard every kind of
environmental problem as a global problem. If you have a lot of free
nature around yourself it doesn’t mean that you then can treat this area
of free nature in a less careful way than if you had practically no free
nature. We have in arctic Norway great areas of free nature and local
people of course mainly say, “why shouldn’t we develop this part of the
country as much as you have developed the south?” Then we must say,
well, it’s global thinking and global thinking makes you an active part
of tremendous importance for the globe as it is, as a whole. And if you
have special or difficult economic problems, then we in the south and
the rest of the world have an obligation to help you and to co-operate
with you in solving these economic problems. No local community or
nation owns any hectare or any square kilometer of the surface of the
globe. I am just as much the owner of the coral reefs on Ishigaki island
as are people in Tokyo. And the people of Ishigaki are just as much the
owners of arctic Norway as Norwegians are. So we have to think globally
in a radical way and that makes the pure kind of anarchism obsolete as a
complete ideal.

Thoreau sharply distinguished between human society and nature in an
almost dualistic way. Would you support planning that would preserve
vast areas of free nature and correspondingly concentrate human
populations more and more into urban centers with the idea of preserving
nature?

Certainly I’m now talking about a future which is near from a geological
point of view, but very far from a political point of view, namely the
question of what might happen in the 22^(nd) and 23^(rd) centuries and
the next thousand years. That would involve a concentration of areas of
fairly dense population, but with access to lots of free nature to work
and play in, and then areas of more or less limited access by humans.
For instance, the Antarctic could still be such an area, but we need
many more big ecosystems where humans do not dominate, where the
atmosphere is fairly pure, and rivers fairly pure, where the evolution
of the Earth could continue at extremely high levels.

Going back to the global emphasis you were talking about before, what
place do local cultures have in relationship to that global awareness?

I think the richness and diversity of deep cultural differences are a
very important part of the global richness and diversity of life. How we
can protect and preserve some of the deep differences in culture is a
major problem. In the middle of the ‘60s, the strength of the movement
to preserve cultures was rather suddenly increased, maybe because of the
Vietnam war, when Americans were not so tremendously proud of being
Americans- if their parents came from Poland they would say, “Oh, I’m
from Poland.” So cultural anthropology has become of great importance at
Universities, that is to say, learning from different cultures. The
Japanese cultural tradition is one of the great cultures, which I hope
will stay deeply different from any others on this Earth.

At the same time many people in Japan now tend to emphasize their
uniqueness. Do you see uniqueness in Japanese culture?

Oh yes, there’s always lots of uniqueness but maybe not always where the
Japanese see it themselves. I see it from the pictures in
advertisements, and so on, that the Japanese have a strong sense for
nature. But they have not yet become aware of the importance of great
areas of free nature or wilderness. They are not yet accustomed to the
sensibility of the deep ecology movement, which came from the United
States and went into Europe but not into Japan. Japan had no great
student movement, probably because of the authoritarian character of its
education. You couldn’t, as in the United States, have thousands of
young people making a lot of noise on behalf of the Earth. Nothing
happened in Japan. When I say nothing happened, I mean on a significant
scale, in terms of population. In Japan you have tremendous small scale
units doing things but it’s not on a large scale. Grassroots movements
must have large scale.

How do you compare the garden variety of nature so appreciated in Japan
with the wild nature, which can be experienced in the northern part of
Norway?

Well, what we look forward to is having every type of landscape,
including landscapes with a lot of temples and with good access for
people who want to walk around, even if it involves a certain amount of
asphalt and cement. The richness and diversity of life is what’s
important. The Japanese garden is part of deep ecology values and a deep
cultural difference from Norway. Especially the stone gardens of Japan
are unique, absolutely unique- a great treasure, and a great treasure
for us Norwegians as well!

Science presumes to be “objective” in its analysis and presentation of
facts. But you’ve considerably emphasized the importance of values and
norms. Is it time for the so-called detached, objective scientist to
become an engaged political activist?

At least it’s time for social scientists and ecological scientists to
become activists, and they are being more active. For instance, the top
organization of this kind is the conservation biology movement, which
has a journal called Conservation Biology. It has definite value
declarations at its basis, just like those who are fighting AIDS or
cancer. Conservation Biology is a science based on explicit values.
Then, more generally I would say that every kind of clear thinking is
value thinking, because you cannot start from facts, deriving any
conclusion whatsoever. You must have rules of interference. But basic
rules of interference have no factual status you cannot prove that they
are valid. You must jump into those rules, using them, without
confirming their validity. So even in mathematics, logic and the exact
sciences, you have a value foundation. There has never been a science
without a value foundation; it is only that the value foundation is not
always explicit.

What role should science play in environmental issues? On one hand,
there’s the notion that science has created a lot of the environmental
problems we are now experiencing. On the other hand, there’s increasing
doubt that technofix solutions are going to work.

We must distinguish between “the enterprise” and “science.” The
scientific enterprise is simply one kind of enterprise in a big society.
And just like war and other enterprises, there can be mainly negative or
mainly positive forces from a philosophical point of view. Science has
been used, as in the Minamata case, to sabotage important reforms of
industry practices. And it is used like that mainly today. Science has
at least as much negative as positive value for the deep ecology
movement, because you can always find researchers who will say that we
don’t know enough to do anything. Here in Japan, science has even more
prestige than in Norway or the United States and it can be used as pure
this or that. There are people who could be immensely important in the
deep ecology movement if they talked publicly, but they mostly see
themselves as specialists. There are of course fabulous counter-examples
to this.

Doesn’t pure intellectual knowledge and active participation come
together in your concept of ecosophy?

Yes, because we have great respect for diversity. So, for instance, here
in Japan it’s a great joy to see insects there are few but insects
that are new to me, which I’ve never seen before. It’s important to have
thousands of people who are purely intellectually interested in, let’s
say, insects. Life forms in rain forests should be described not only
biologically, but also behaviorally, before they disappear. We must
reckon with many more species of animals and plants which will be
exterminated within thirty years. But the lack of trained people who can
classify and describe life forms is terrifying. Every day, probably,
there is a species destroyed in Brazil and the universities of the world
are more or less completely indifferent toward the question of educating
taxonomists. About 20,000 taxonomists are immediately needed, but the
tremendously rich universities of the world are incapable of delivering
them.

What do you think are our realistic prospectives for the future for
humankind?

There will be no ultimate catastrophe involving all humankind or
involving all high organisms on the Earth. But there may be
deterioration in the quality of life both in and outside cities. And
there will be hundreds of catastrophes on the order of Chernobyl. I look
forward to this trend changing in the 22^(nd) century, at the earliest.

The 22^(nd) century?

The next century the 21^(st)  I’m afraid won’t see any great social
and ecological progress.
