1990.1

Sustainable Development and the Deep Ecology Movement[1]

Arne Naess

I. From ecology to ecosophy

The study of non-industrial cultures reveals their insistence upon the
meaningfulness of life and the importance of behavior in conformity with
traditional beliefs expressing the meaning. A large part of the
energies, mental and physical, is devoted to religious and other
practices supporting the special belief structures characteristic of
each culture. The pressure towards conformity has often been immense and
naturally most resented among the young and still not completeed
adapted.

The advent of rich industrial cultures seems to have made it possible to
skip these labors in support of beliefs in the meaningfulness of life.
What is left of non-industrial cultures today is threatened by the
nearly irresistable lure of the 'free', 'unconcerned' ways of life
manifested by tourists, economic development experts, and other visitors
from the rich nations. To the young these strange beings often seem to
have been able to get rich and free of onerous social duties fast and
effortless. They seem to live a glorious life without deeper meaning and
attachments. It is not difficult to understand that in the poor
non-industrial countries there is a prevalent hope among the young to
develop into countries like the contemporary industrial ones. The
cultural cost of the economic growth with the rich nations as an ideal
is rarely considered or, if considered, perhaps strongly under-rated.
The ecological cost is largely unknown.

From the point of view of the history of ideas one may trace a line of
thinkng roughly suggested by the formula 'from the idea of "progress" to
that of "development" and "economic growth", and from these ideas to
that of "ecologically sustainable development".' What some of us hope
for is a further step along this line from ecological to long range
"ecosophical" development with emphasis on the need for wisdom (sophia)
as much as need for science and technology. If this line is followed we
shall have to study the loss of beliefs and cultural identity now
happenig under the tremendous impact of the economy and technology of
the big, powerful and rich industrial societies. As members of these
societies we are

largely responsible for this impact and the resulting cultural shock.
Any model of ecologically sustainable development must contain answers,
however tentative, as to how to avoid contributing to thoughtless
destruction of cultures, and to the disemination of the belief in a
glorious, meaningless life.

The above goal may be expressed shorter by asking for an ecosophically
sustainable development. Every decision in every country in the world
has today an ecosophical aspect. The centers of philosophical and
religious thinking have to be mobilized as energetically as the centers
of ecological, economical, and technological learning.

Practically every country is today developing in a way that is
ecologically unsustainable. The term 'developing country' should either
be avoided or applied to rich countries as well as the poor. And it
might be added that it is a goal of the rich countries to change
policies in such a way that they eventually reach a level of sustainable
development.

Because of the wide range of cultures deeply affected by
unsustainability the philosophical and religious underpinning of their
change towards sustainabillity must differ. There must be a marked
pluralism of ultimate conceptions of meaningfulness. I place these
conceptions of philosophical or religious kinds on 'level 1' in
systematizations of programs of development. From conceptions on this
basic level 1 should be able to derive ecosophically important views
furnishing guidelines for change. The important thing here is to
recognize that if we hope for rich cultural diversity on Earth in the
future, there can be no completely general blueprint for development.
Development must differ in order to ascertain cultural continuity. By
insisting on the relevance of a level 1, any concrete plans must be
tried out whether they are good or bad for cultural continuity of
change, for persistence of deep cultural deiversity on Earth.

II. 'Deep Ecology' and 'World Conservation Biology'

The ecophilosphically important kind of general views I am going to
formulate and discuss in what follows are characteristic of the views of
a great number of active people form many nations. The views ae open to
different

articulations. I shall use a set of tentative formulations,

the so-called "deep ecology platform" comprising 8 points.[2]

A deep ecology platform formulation

1. The welfare and flourishing of human and non-human living

beings has value in itself. The value of the non-human beings is
independent of their usefulness to humans.

2. Richness and diversity of kinds of living beings has value

in itself.

3. Humans have no right to reduce this richness and diversity

except to satisfy vital human needs.

4. The flourishing of human life and cultures is compatible

with a substantial decrease of the human population. The

flourishing of non-human life requires such a decrease.

5. Present human interference with the non-human world is ex-

cessive, and the situation is rapidly worsening.

6. Policies must be changed in view of points 1 to 5. These

policies affect basic economic, technological and ideo-

logical structures. The resulting state of human affairs

will be deeply different from the present.

7. The appreciaton of a high quality of life will supercede that of a
high standard of living.

8. Those who accept the foregoing points have an obligation

to try to contribute directly or indirectly to the imple-

mentation of necessary changes

III. Intrinsic, not only utilitarian, value of non-human life

Let me compare the 8 points of the deep ecology platform with basic
views on sustainable development, starting with the requirements of
living resources.

The exceptionally careful formulations in Chapter 1 of WCS, the World
Conservation Strategy of 1980, will be extensively quoted. The term
'development' is there defined as follows:

WCS 1 "... the modification of the biosphere and the application of
human ... living and non-living resources to satisfy human needs and
improve the quality of human life."

Its close relation to the term conservation is made clear:

WCS 2 "... the management of human use of the biosphere so that it may
yield the greatest sustainable benefit to present generations while
maintaining its potential to meet the needs and aspirations of future
generations."

The term 'sustainable' is not defined, but to sustain future generations
is meant to imply the long term support of full life conditions on
Earth. This is clear from the two opening sentences of the first chapter
of WCS:

WCS 3 "Earth is the only place in the universe known to sustain life.
Yet human activities are progressively reducing the planet's
life-supporting capacity at a time when rising human numbers and
consumptions are making increasingly heavy demands on it."

It is difficult and for the purpose of this article unnecessary to try
to determine the exact relation of agreements, disagreements and neutral
aspects between the intended meanings of the WCS and the platform
formulations. Suffice to suggest tensions that may occur to many
readers.

The expressed concern for non-human life for its own sake is not
completely absent from WCS, but unnecessarily subdued. Nevertheless, in
WCS quotation 3 the notion "the planet's life supporting capacity" is
used, not "the planet's man-supporting capacity". In the first chapter
of WCS, "a new environmental ethics" is asked for, and it may plausibly
be interpreted as an ethics where non-human life is considered to be
conserved also for its own sake. Furthermore, the title "World
Conservation Strategy" suggests something wider than conservation for
the sake solely of humans.

The ultimate exclusive concern for humans is expressed clearly by many
formulations in WCS: "Conservation, like development, is for
people,...". In the WCS 2 quotation the reference to generations may,
taken in isolation, be interpreted so as to cover all living beings, but
that is not possible when reading the context.

Whereas point 1 concerns individual living beings whether comparatively
alike or not, point 2 concerns the diversity of forms. It supports a
policy of non-interference with continued evolution, for example of
mammals demanding vast territory, and of highly different landscapes
with their special organisms.

IV. Rights and vital needs

From the narrow definition of development in WCS (see p.2) it follows
that satisfaction of non-human needs and the improvement of the life
quality of any non-human kind of being cannot possibly be a part of
development in a direct way.

There is at least one possibility of making the quotations on
'development' from WCS compatible with the first two points of the deep
ecology platform. It leans heavily upon two hypotheses: Mature human
beings adhere at least implicitly to the first two points about
intrinsic value. They accordingly experience a strong need to protect
against actions and policies incompatible with them. If the two
hypotheses are accepted, one may assert that there is human need to
protect nature for its own sake. If usefulness for humans is defined as
appropriateness as a means to satisfy

human needs, protection of the full richness and diversity of non-human
life on Earth for its own sake acquires the status of usefulness for
humans. The protection is useful independently of its usefulness for
other ends, such as the health or prosperity of humans. On the basis of
the above hypotheses protection for its own sake is fully compatible
with important forms of utilitarianism. I personally accept the
hypotheses when 'maturity' is taken in the strong sense of all-sideed
(German allseitige) maturity.

This admission of utilitarianism of sorts is important

for supporters of the deep ecology movement, who tend to conceive
themselves as utilitarians and don't feel at home with valuations
seemingly 'totally independent' of human valuation.

The term 'maturity' may be interpreted in different ways. It has to do
with a development of both judgment and emotions, and presuppose
experience, but not necessarily that of living close to nature.
Sustainable development being defined in terms of satisfaction of human
needs will therefore have to take into account the protection of nature
for its own sake.

The expression 'value in itself' (Selbstwert in German) of points 1 and
2 of the platform is a source of debate. My own interpretation is most
clear when we talk about beings that may be said to have or show
preference or interests. When we say 'Do it for its (or his or her) own
sake!', 'It was done for its (his, her) own sake', or in comparable
situations use the term 'for its own sake' as contrasted with for the
sake only of something else, this is a sufficient ground for attributing
value in itself to what we speak about. I do not attach any professional
philosophic meaning of these expressions, but a sort of meaning well
known in daily life situations. I also refrain from any professional
philosophic analysis, I talk as a mere supporter of the deep ecology
movement among thousands of others.

The firm acceptance of the two first points of the platform is of
considerable social and political importance: As long as major efforts
to protect, and as far as it is still possible, to restore richness and
diversity of life on Earth, are argued for solely on the basis of narrow
utilitarianism, they will be piecemeal, not holistic. They will not
concern whole ecosystems, not carried out with maximal perspective in
time and space. Without respect for the ecosphere as a whole, efforts
will continue to be focussed on special spectacular items, pandas,
wolves, acid rain, the ozone layer, CO₂, ... . Respect for the planet
facilitates acceptance of long range efforts including changes of human
societies. Ecologically sustainable development will automatically refer
to the whole planet and not to ecologically arbitrary boundaries of
nations.

The terms 'life' and 'living' as used need comments.

When a campaign with the aim to protect a river against so-called
developed is launched, the slogan 'Let the river

live!' does not concern the H₂O of the river, but a somewhat vaguely
conceived ecosystem as a whole - a 'living' whole. In some cases it
includes people who live along the river or use the river in an
ecologically responsible, sustainable way. This broad ecologically
inspired way of interpreting the term 'life' of a river is important
when forming strategies of conservation of resource. It is clear that
most campaigners for the protection of a river against major
interference do not only have narrow usefulness in mind, but feel the
interference to touch or reduce the meaning of their own lives. People
try to protect a vital need for meaning and what is necessary to
maintain that meaning. A development which is expected to reduce that
meaning is not sustainable. We are led to a concept of sustainable
development for this satisfaction of human needs which protects the
planet also for its own sake. The Gaia-hypothesis has shown its value
not only as a working hypothesis, but also as a way of experiencing the
Earth as alive in a broad sense adapted to people in cultures with
Western science.

V. The right to satisfy vital needs

Humans have no right to reduce the richness and diversity of life on
Earth except to satisfy vital human needs. This is essentially the third
point of the platform. Obviously it is not unreservedly against the
limitation of any human needs and desires, not against the most
extraordinary richness of feast - as we know them from non-industrial
cultures. Nor is it automatically implied that the presumably not very
great number of people with deep and intense joy of producing a lot of
children should somehow be discouraged. But if there is already a vast
population of humans and still there is to be an increase, this will
have detrimental consequences both for humans and non-humans.

Philosophers who are dubious about the notion of 'right' propose its
elimination, for instance using the phrase "humans should not..."
instead of "humans do not have the right to...". But the postulation of
certain 'human rights' has a positive influence today. As long as the
term is used in this connection, it might also be used to refer to
non-humans.

Painstaking analysis of its precise meaning or lack of precise meaning
is a worthy occupation within departments of philosophy. Whatever the
highly controversial conclusions, such analyses have no direct
implication for the justification of declarations of rights of man or
animal. Some say that the humans can have rights because they have
obligations. Animals don't have obligations, therefore they have no
rights. Such a limitation of the meaning of 'rights' is not found in
everyday use of the term, however. Examples: rights of lunatics and of
small children.

Formal 'Declarations of rights of animals' have been codified. A
Norwegian version was signed by thousands of

people, and a pilot study of answers to questions whether animals and
plants have rights revealed a great majority of positive views.[3]

The acceptance of point 3 does not, strictly speaking, depend on the
acceptance of the existence of rights of humans and non-humans. If a
mother says to her son, "You have no right to prevent your little sister
from eating all her birthday cakes", this does not imply any doctrine of
rights of sisters to eat. There is an important everyday usage of the
expression 'no right to' which has to do with injustice and related
phenomena. The same applies to 'no right to' in the formulation of point
3.

Not included in the 8 points, but quite expressive of opinions among
supporters of the deep ecology movement is the following formulation:
'Every living being has the right to live and flourish'. Logically
perhaps more satisfying:'There is a right that every living being has:
the right to live and flourish'.

The intention when using the strong term 'vital need' is to announce a
limit of justifiable interference. Not every demand on the market proves
that there is a corresponding need. Hundreds of millions of people have
unsatisfied vital needs of the most pressing kinds, hundreds of millions
of others are wasting the resources of the planet and decreasing general
life conditions for purposes generally considered trivial and unworthy,
but more or less unavoidable as things are today.

The gigantic gross national product of the rich industrialized states is
unfortunately a measure of a gigantic pollution and waste with doubtful
gain for human life quality. It was already in the 60s called Gross
National Pollution, GNP. In short, an increase in GNP does not guarantee
an increase in the satisfaction of vital needs. This fact is painfully
obvious in poor countries where increases so far have had little
influence among the desperately poor.

Where to draw the limit between vital and non-vital is a question that
must be related to local, regional and national particularities. Even
then a certain area of disagreement must be taken as normal.

VI The population factor

'What is the carrying capacity of the Earth?' This question has often
been raised with a narrow frame of reference:

Premise 1: Nature has no intrinsic value, so we need not have any other
animals or plants than those which clearly science or tradition tells us
are useful for us. 'Carrying capacity'

can therefore only imply 'carrying capacity for humans', not 'carrying
capacity for humans and non-humans'.

Premise 2: If there is a conflict between the human urge for space for
more human settlements and the urge of other species for more territory,
humans have a priority and may even reduce the habitats of the others.

Generally it has also been taken for granted - with some
justifications - that new technology which makes increases of population
manageable will continue to occur, for instance new 'green (read: blue)
revolutions', relying heavily on chemicals and a transition from small
scale family agriculture to agrobusiness.

Today the old debate on the carrying capacity seems rather queer. What
is now at stake is the free richness and diversity of life on this
planet and the life quality and cultural diversity of humans. Those two
goals are not seen as in conflict according to an increasing group of
people.

Point 4 of the deep ecology platform contains two rather

different propositions. The history of humanity covers a vast diversity
of cultures combined with rather modest populations. Contemporary
destruction of cultures does not proceed because

of lack of humans. Admittedly it is a rather abstract view, but it
furnishes an important long range, global perspective: that of a number
of people few enough to avoid gigantic bureaucracies and insufferable
crowding, have easy access to free nature, and spacious room for every
activity consistent with 'live and let live'.

What the first proposition on point 4 does not mention is the transition
period, let us say, from 8000 million to substantially fewer people than
there are today. Perhaps a transition period of 1000 years is needed. Or
perhaps much less. In any case, the long perspective is liberating for
our minds, and of practical importance for long range planning of cities
and areas of free nature. Furthermore, the prospect of a period with
comparatively few small children should incite us to more thinking about
how to make it possible for every child-loving adult to enjoy the
company and care of small children all their lives. The dominance of the
nucleus family concept in rich countries largely excludes this.

The presentation of a vision of a stabilization-reduction-stabilization
process does rarely meet objections among deep ecology supporters, but
it cannot be said to be a favorite theme! More old people and less
children -unpalatable. And how are people persuaded to limit child
production? Cruelty and injustice must by all means be avoided.

Against the second proposition of point 4 - that maintaining, and I am
tempted to add, restoring, the richness and diversity of life on Earth,
require a significantly smaller population than 5000 million - it may be
objected that complete victory of ecologically responsible policies
might decrease undesirable interference of 5000 million humans

towards zero. But it seems to me that this process may prove to meet as
many or more obstacles as the reduction of the population. Very large
populations create very large problems of 'freedom and organization'.
(Bertrand Russell). Centraliz-ation, gigantism and reduction of cultural
diversity, seem unavoidable features with 5000 million around.
Interference with nature and interference with each other must be a
great problem.

Plans for sustaianble development often neglect the population issue.
The subject is a touchy one. This colors, for isntance , the so-called
Brundtland Report on 'Our Common Future'. Several assumptions and
attitudes make responsible and energetic population policy difficult:
(1) It is unreasonably assumed that because a humane and otherwise
acceptable population reduction will take a long time, perhaps many
centuries, it is unimportant to discuss it, and prepare for it. (2) As
long as the populations of rich nations, which account for a large part
of the degradation of life conditions on Earth, try to uphold their
present populations, the rich have little credibility when they try to
push poor nations towards rapid stabilization. (3) It is unreasonably
supposed that the economy, and therefore life quality, of rich nations
will necessarily be adversely affected in the transition period towards
lower population. (4) Global competetion for power and military strength
is considered inevitable and is thought to favor big populations. (5) It
is unreasonably assumed that successful population reduction policies
must make it difficult for people who deeply love children (for their
own sake) to have four or more of them.

A good meal in the rich countries may require directly and indirectly,
about as 40 times as much energy as a first rate dinner in a Third World
country. Cleaning operations may result in 80 times as much pollution
due to chemicals etc. This means that, for instance, in Norway with
about 4 million people, the energy consumption in eating compares to
that of 160 million in a sustainable energy economy and to that of 320
million in washing. Planetary stress would be much more reduced with 1
million less Norwegians than 1 million less people in Calcutta.

A simple conclusion: Sustainable development of populations is clearly a
subject of importance in every country, and the greatest responsibility
rests with the richest. We must expect an increase of population during
most of the next century. Subsequent reduction must be part of the
scenario of sustainable future development. Policies based on
expectations of great Earth-saving technological revolutions are
irresponsible.

From points 1 to 5 of the platform it follows that those who support the
deep ecology movement envisage not only deep political, social, and
economic changes but also that of personal lifestyle. (Point 6 of the
platform). Except in a period of transition, life quality may gain in
spite of

decreases in the standard of living in the rich countries. (Point 7 of
the platform). This decrease is inevitable following one of the rules of
universalizability: not to favor a level of standard of living for
yourself which depends upon others' not reaching that level.

The term 'standard of living' is preferred to 'material standard of
living' because the latter suggests 'spiritual standard of living' as
the opposite. But there need not necessarily be a shift towards
spirituality when people attain higher life quality combined with stable
or lower standard of living. In a community with good, intimate
relations between members they may use more time together in a relaxed
way instead of 'going shopping'. As Mother Theresa said privately when
receiving the Nobel Peace Prize: It is not we but you who are poor.

We, the rich, are poor in deep satisfactions requiring simple means, the
means being material, spiritual, or beyond that somewhat arbitrary
distinction.

The term 'life quality' is used as in that part of life quality research
where the life quality indicators clearly are distinguished from the
material or rather, means-oriented indicators of established standard of
life statistics.

VII Cultural Diversity

Introduction of life-saving medicines and life-destroying weapons
produced in the industrial countries severely undercut the status of the
traditional leadership in non-industrial communities. Development tended
to be conceived by their new leaders as merely an increase of industrial
activity and of consumption. Traditional societies before the great
cultural shock were always in transition, but very slowly. The
tremendous speed of change caused by the influence from dominating
industrial states has severely damaged cultural identity, self-reliance
and even self-respect in many areas of formerly deep variety of vigorous
self-respecting cultures. There is now a growing trend to look for the
assistance of traditional medicines, traditional ways of population
stabilization, traditional ecological insights, and in general for
support of customs which still have some authority and which clearly
favors sustainable development including sustainable cultural identity,
and population proportional to resources.

Any general view inspired by ecology includes reverence for the richness
and diversity of human cultures and sub-cultures. The reverence for life
implies this as a special case. The sometimes uncritical imitation of
Western ways by Third World leaders and economic elites is now hopefully
on the decline. Modern cultural and social anthropology shows how
countries of great material poverty compared to the industrial
nevertheless maintained extremely rich cultural traditions. An example:
The Sherpa village of Beding (Peding) in Nepal, 3700 meter above
sea-level, had in the 70s only about 150 people. Statistics show that
they are among the world's poorest. But their monastery was beautiful
and well-kept by their numerous monks and nuns. Much work had an
artistic or religious significance. Feasts were sometimes of
overwhelming richness and might go on for a week, starting before
sunrise with music performed by the monks in honor of their great
mountain Tseringma (Gauri Shankar, 7149 meters high). Faced with the
question of whether they wanted to enjoy the richness that would result
from foreign expeditions to their unclimbed mountain, or have it
protected from degrading Western behavior, all 47 families cast their
votes for protection. But the central government of Nepal and the
world's mountain-eering associations had no sympathy for such a strange
idea: 'protection of a mountain!!?' The cultural needs of the community
did not count. The central government thought of 'progress', the
mountaineers of 'conquests'.[4]

In the 60s new generations of students of social and cultural
anthropology and a number of critical researchers

described non-industrial cultures in such a way that it seemed that the
rich industrial societies had as much to learn from the non-industrial
as the other way round. The increase of

respect for non-industrial cultures made itself felt about the same time
as the sudden internationalization of the ecological movement with
nature in its focus. The way the French anthropologist Marshall Sahlins
described certain stone age tribes conveyed the message that essential
life quality could perhaps not be lower among them.[5] At least there
were some fundamental aspects of life quality which were at a high
level, such as economic security, absence of stressing work, and lots of
time for meaningful togetherness bridging the generations.

Anyhow, among the many aspects of non-industrial cultures which caught
the attention was their relations to nature. Their relations to
resources were mostly sustainable. One obvious reason: moderate
population and adequate distance between tribes ascertained sustainable
development. The former view that traditional societies did not develop
but were completely inert, has been rejected through an explosive
increase of knowledge about the history of non-industrial cultures.

Sustainable development today means development along the lines of each
culture, not development along a common,

centralized line. But faced with hungry children, humanitarian action is
a priority, whatever its relation to developmental plans and cultural
invasion.

Social justice has an ecological side. Let us take mobility. In a poor
country a poor trader sitting in his bazaar and travelling in his
district on foot, horse or bicycle, covers, say 3000 km a year. The
spending of non-renewable resources + pollution + ... amount to, say, x
units. The rich country trader uses airplanes and cars, seldom trains.
He travels enormous distances a year. Unecological results, y, perhaps a
million times more than x! The unecology quota for the one person may be
100 times greater than the other. Or take amusement and vacations. A
child of 5 travels with rich parents and receives mechanical toys
produced with large unecology quota per toy. Again y equals to perhaps a
million x's. For teenagers the social inequality between the groups are
still greater.

The degradation of the life conditions of the planet per capita is
highly dependent upon the social life style of the individual. The life
style depends upon class, upon social stratification, upon social
services and protection received. Living on garbage and garbage dumps,
unprotected, uncared for by doctors, a person does not receive service
from medical and other social institutions which in rich countries
depend upon polluting industries. Pharmaceutical industry, pills,
machinery, buildings result for a poor person in x unecology units, for
a rich person of moderate health y units. Again y

may be a million or more times than x.

The great future effort to reduce per capita degradation of conditions
of life will demand discipline, demand changes

of habits. Evidently social conflicts, moral resentment, will attain
dangeroous intensities if there is not an increase in the level of
social justice - local, group, national, inter-national. The rich power
elites in poor countries will, if life style is not changed, be judged
as combined ecological and ethical misfits. Violent reactions must be
expected.

VIII. The convergence of the development of rich and poor

A world conservation strategy implies acceptance of sustainable
development. Such development is - or should be - implicit in the
programs of green parties and the visions of green societies. The main
relation between the deep ecology movement and the ideals of green
societies is simple: The establishment of a green society presupposes
the implemen-tation of the necessary changes suggested in the platform
formulation. This declaration remains, however, on a rather abstract
conceptual level. If it is posited as a goal that all human societies
should be green, it is pertinent to ask:"What about deep cultural and
subcultural diversity?" The blueprints of green societies have so far
been the work of industrial Westerners, a rather specialized fragment of
humanity. It is to be hoped, but it cannot be taken as a certainty, that
development consistent with the guidelines of the deep ecology movement
admits and even encourages such a manifold.

From the very beginning, the international deep ecology movement has
been non-violent to a high degree, and general Gandhian viewpoints have
been common among its supporters. The armament race with all its grave
consequences is incompatible with a high level of sustainable
development.[6] This has consequences not only for the programs of green
parties, but for all realistic sustainable development plans. From the
point of view of the deep ecology movement the victory of the slogan
'sustainable development!' over the post-war slogans 'economic
development!', 'economic growth!' and the simplicistic 'development!' is
itself due to an awakening from ecological slumber and should be greeted
with joy and expectation.

The broadness and deepness of sustainability guidelines clarifies a new
important perspective. The rich countries are now rightly expected to
see themselves as developing. Their present lack of sustainability is
grave and the challenge is formidable. For the poor countries the
outlook is different. They may avoid the one-sided industrial phase with
its

consumerism and enter a green post-industrial stage on a higher level of
sustainability. For both rich and poor the obstacles are formidable and
all sorts of conflicts, including wars, may occur along the way. But
long range global sustainability as a central concern may also bring
societies together in a more peaceful and joyful endeavor than ever
before.

|

|

|

rich

|

|

|

poor

IX. Summing up

Today there are few or no communities, societies and cultures which show
a clear long range sustainability. Such sustainability I define as the
combination of long range ecological sustainability and a satisfactory
life quality. What is "satisfactory" we scarcely need quarrel about as
long as we agree that hundreds of millions of children live on an
unsatisfactory level.

A development, or general trend of pattern of change, within and among
communities, societies or cultures, is ecologically sustainable if it is
compatible with restoring and maintaining the richness and diversity of
life (in the broadest sense) of the planet.

Research today or in the future is scarcely able to point unambiguously
to any definite way of how to get such a development going. In practice
we shall for a long time have to fight obviously unsustainable
developments. This implies that we shall have to implement changes
leading towards a sustainable development.

The industrial countries, will, during this phase, be developing
countries, but unsustainable to a diminishing degree.

Selected background literature

Brown, Lester R. a.o. (eds.), State of the World 1988, A Worldwatch
institute Report on Progress Towards a Sustainable Society,Washington
1988, especially chapter 10. Indispensible!

Brown, Lester R., Building a Sustainable Society, N.Y., W.W.Norton,
1981.

Brown, Lester R. & E.C.Wolf, Reversing Africa's Decline, Worldwatch
Paper 68, Washington 1985.

Carpenter,Stanley R., "Technoaxiology: "Appropriate Norms for Technology
Assessment", in P.T. Durbin and E.Rapp (eds.), Philosophy and
Technology, 115-136. - Every technique must be scrutinized as to global
sustainability.

Fox,Michael W., Agricide. The Hidden Crisis that Affects Us All, N.Y.
Schocken Books 1987.

Henderson, Hazel, Creating Alternative Futures. The end of Economics, A
Berkeley Windhover Book published by Berkeley Publishing Corp., 1978. -
Hazel Henderson is in many ways E.F.Schumacher's successor.

Milbrath,Lester W., "A Proposed Value Structure for a Sustainable
Society", The Environmentalist,4,1984, pp.113-124.

Naess, A., "Self-realization. An Ecological Approach to Being in the
World",Keith Memorial Lecture,Murdoch University, 1986.

Naess,A., "Consequences of an Absolute 'No' to Nuclear War", in Avner
Cohen and Steven Lee,(eds.), Nuclear Weapons and the

Future of Mankind, Totowa:Rowman & Allenheld, 1986. - Unilateral
military disarmament a wise policy and ecologically central.

Naess,A., "Population Reduction. An Ecosophical View", Paper submitted
to the Fourth Wilderness Conference, Colorado, 1987. Mimeographed.

Naess, A., "Solidarity, Money and the Well-to-do, Pan Ecology, Vol.1,
No.3, 1987, pp.1-4.

Norderhaug,M., Norsk Bistand år 2000: Kommentar til endel økologiske
problemer og rammebetingelser. Utredes. DUH. 1987.

Norderhaug,M., Jordens miljøtilstand, under publication 1988.

Schwarz,Walter and Dorothy, Breaking Through. Theory and Practice of
wholistic Living, Bideford: Green Books 1987.

Porritt, Jonathan, ed., Friends of the Earth, Handbook, London: Optima,
1987.

Porritt, Jonathan, Seeing Green, The Politics of Ecology Explained,
London: Basil Blackwell, 1984.

[1] Shortened and published with new title in Ethics of Environment and
Development, ed. J.Ronald Engel, IUCN/Cambridge University of Press.

[2] On the so-called deep ecology movement, see e.g. Bill Devall and
George Sessions, Deep Ecology, Salt Lake City, 1985, and Arne Naess,
"The Deep Ecology Movement, Some Philosophical Aspects", Philosophical
Inquiry, 8, 1986, No.1-2, pp.10-31. No. 1-2 also contains other articles
on the movement. In what follows I refer to the short, but weighty
publication World Conservation Strategy, WCS, prepared by IUCN in
collaboration with UNEP, WWF, FAO, and UNESCO, obtainable from IUCN,
1196 Gland, Switzerland.

[3] Ekspertenes syn på naturens egenverdi, Trondheim: Tapir.
ISBN82-519-0824-8.

[4] See Naess, "Modesty and the Conquest of Mountains" in The Mountain
Spirit, ed. Michael C.Tobias & H.Drasdo, N.Y.: The Overlook Press, 1979,
pp.13-16. The letter sent in 1971 to the King of Nepal is printd in
Erling D. Naess' book, Autobiography of a Shipping Man, Seatrade
Publications, 1977.

[5] Marhsall Sahlins, Stone Age Economics, Chicago, 1972.

[6] An ecologically inspired proposal for unilateral disarmament:
A.Naess, "Consequences of an Absolute No to Nuclear War", in Avner Cohen
& Steven Lee, eds., Nuclear Weapons and the Future of Humanity, Totowa
1986, pp.425-436.
