1990B

Deepness of Questions and the Deep Ecology Movement

Arne Naess

1.Historical Vorspiel

This is a revised and shortened edition of an MS "Deepness of Questions"
written in the 70s and because of its manifest weaknesses, was
distributed only to a selected few. It reappears now because some
interest in it persists, and because it got a prominant place in the
important doctoral dissertation of Warwick Fox.

This new version will also be sent only to a selected few.

Conservation may be said to be the social movement which tries to
conserve what is the best in what already exists. Such short expressions
of what a social movement 'is' may have some value in some contexts, but
generally a social movement requires fairly complex characterizations.
Attempts to shorten them into one sentence which is then treated as
so-called definitions or criteria are rarely successful - or the
sentence gets to be too long and complicated. The term 'the deep ecology
movement' has been introduced through characterizations using more than
100 words. Vagueness and ambiguity are of course unavoidable, but
attempts to offer one sentence characterizations or "senses" of the term
have not been very successful.

In my "The Deep Ecology Movement: Some Philosophical Aspects", in
Philosophical Inquiry, 8, 1986, the contrast between deep and shallow
ecological movements is characterized by using about 150 words. One
difference is said to be decisive, it "concerns willingness to question
and to appreciate the importance of questioning every economic and
political policy in public. The questioning is 'deep' and public."
(p.21).

There has never been a proposal for defining deep ecology or shallow
ecology movement only through their respective relations to the deep
questioning[1]. One cannot leave out reference to ecology in their
definitions. But comparing the two movements, the deep and the shallow
(or reform) ecology movements, the relative deeper questioning
(Problematizierung) of the former is quite manifest. It has been and
still is my hypothesis that any systematical contemporary philosophy
will, if it takes a stand in the ecological crisis, supports the deep
ecology movement. Supporters of the deep ecology movement have therefore
no systematic philosophy to fight. This is a strategically important
hypothesis.

The modern predicament is thoughtlessness rather than thought. In one
sense we may say: if deep questioning, then there is compatibility with
ecosophy T or other ecosophies articulating the perspectives of deep
ecology movement. But then 'deepness' must include not only systematic
philosophical deepness, but also the 'deepness' of proposed social
changes. This second requirement was not stated in the previous version
of the MS.

2.Persistent 'Why?' and 'How?'

Let us inspect the chain of questions in the following dialogue:

(1) A: Turn on the gas!

(2) B: Why?

(3) A: Because we are going to boil the potatoes.

(4) B: Why?

(5) A: Because we ought to have dinner soon.

(6) B: Why?

(7) A: Because we should keep fit.

(8) B: Why?

(9) A: Because we should do what makes us feel happy.

(10) B: Why?

(11) A: Because happiness is what we ultimately desire.

(12) B: Why?

(13) A: 'Happiness' means satisfaction of all biological and

social needs.

(14) B: Why?

At step (13) the pure why-chain turns from normative to descriptive.
This may lead us into discussing the etymology of the term 'happiness'
and other unphilosophical specialities. The 'why' at (10) and at (12) is
within the traditions of philosophy and deeper - I would say - than at
(8) or even at (13). Furthermore, I would perhaps rather arbitrarily,
say that the 'why' at (8) is deeper, or leads, or may more easily lead,
into deeper water than (6).

At the start of introductory courses in philosophy my habit of
persistently asking why, whatever the answers to my questions, for
instance "what time is it?", makes the students bemused, bewildered,
frustrated or angry in a remarkably fruitful way for the whole course.
Within less than 10 minutes they are ready for anything.

Some get happily bewildered because they feel I make fun of them or that
their sanity is tested.

The happily bewildered remind me of the research on 'tolerance of
ambiguity' in the 30s and 40s motivated by the astonishing popularity of
fascist and national socialist ideas. One working hypothesis said that
intolerance of the ambiguity of a situation correlated highly with
indicators of acceptance of fascist ideas: There should always be rules
for correctness. The only test of saneness is correctness. Certain
questions could be asked, others could not be asked. Idle wondering is
dangerous, keep straight!

- Suppose the above dialogue at an early stage went descriptive and
explanatory:

(1) A: Turn on the gas!

(b) B: Why?

(3b) A: Because, if you do not turn on the gas the water will not boil.

(4b) B: Why?

(5b) A: Because cold water needs heat from the gas in order to reach
boiling point.

(6b) B: Why?

(7b) A: Boiling requires that water molecules attain higher velocities
and these must be transferred from the hot flame of the gas.

(8b) B: Why?

(9b) A: Because, utlimately, quantum mechanical and thermodynamical laws
prescribes certain conditions to be fulfilled.

(10b) B: Why?

(11b) A: We have no good reason to think that heating might be done
otherwise than in conformity with physical and chemical laws or theories
accepted today.

(12b) B: Why?

Again we have landed in philosophy. Why-strings in science inevitably
lead us beyond science. Sequences of 'how?' show similar traits. Sooner
or later we arrive in fields of inquiry typical of philosophy:

(1c) A: Turn on the gas!

(2c) B: How?

(3c) A: Put your fingers here and turn to the left.

(4c) B: How?

(5c) A: Activate certain muscles of your underarm...!

(6c) B: How?

(7c) A: By deciding to do so.

(8c) B: How?

(9c) A: Pull yourself together!

(10c) B: How?

(11c) A: Use your free will!

It seems that we can lead a dialogue out of philosophy even when
continuing our why's and how's, but not without certain kinds of
diversive steps or side tracking manoeurvres:

(12c) B: How?

(13c) A: By a careful study of the philosophy of personal development.

It might be possible to keep the dialogue within the borders of
techniques of study a couple of steps further. But roughly the
conclusion holds: persistent questioning leads to deeper questions.

The importance of the conclusion is limited because whereas question no.
n may lead deeper, n + 1 may lead back to trivialities as exemplified by
(12c). And which concepts of 'depth' are intended? 'Deep mathematical
theorems' is something, 'deep grammatical structure' something else. Is
philosophy invariably 'deep'? Deep water can be distinguished from murky
water, but how are deep questions and answers distinguished from murky
ones? Let us say the dialogue takes this turn:

(x) There is something rather than nothing

(x+1) Why?

(x+2) ...

The Heideggerian literature at step (x+2) some of us will characterize
as murky rather than deep, or at least both murky and deep.

In a critical situation a proposal A of how to act may be said to be
based on a set of premises, some of them explicitly formulated in A,
others playing the role of unarticulated 'presuppositions'
(Collingwood). Suppose a proposal B is based on the same set of premises
except one, an unarticulated presupposition P. B questions
(problematizes) P, doesn't find it tenable and rejects proposal A. In
this critical situation B may be said to question deeper than A, and the
deeper question may be said to be 'Why P?'.

The above is written just to touch upon the difficult questions we face
if we try to formulate fairly simple, but useful, analyses
(precizations) of 'deep questions', 'deeper questioning' and similar
expressions.

The questions do not, in my view, undermine the usefulness and
appropriateness of the designation 'deep ecology movement'. But they
justify the comments by Warwick Fox, David Rothenberg and others, that
what the authors supporting the movement write is often sketchy,
tentative, preliminary (using my words rather than theirs). The peace
movement has produced much heavier stuff and also highly elaborated
doctrines.

Comparing argumentation patterns within the shallow and the deep
movements, I find that the supporters of the deep ecology movement (as
characterized in certain texts[2]) ask the deeper questions. But they
are rarely zetetics, questioning everything. On the contrary. Like
Rachel Carson they tend to have firm convictions - at a deep level: like
people in the two other great movements, the peace movement and the
social justice movment.

It is essential to note that the characterizations offered in the above
articles do not contain the term 'deep questioning'. It they did, some
of what I say in what follows would be mere tautologies like 'The deep
questioning movement is deep questioning.'

Inspecting my examples of why- and how-strings some might wonder: are
they not also suited for introducing concepts of 'p being sillier than
q'? The question reminds us of the concept of relevance. When questions
of what to do (or not to do) in a given situation is relevant - and they
are always relevant - why- and how-strings sooner or later get to be
irrelevant. They get sillier from the point of view of action. If we
start a string of questions and answers why and how we eat, to eat gets
more and more relevant as the hours pass. Action, in this case eating,
cuts the Gordian knot, but leaves all questions open, and leaves all
answers invoked to account for decision and action questionable.

The main reaction of the Department of Agriculture and the chemical
industry to the accusations of Rachel Carson's The Silent Spring was
"wildly exaggerated!" If this factual and normative premise is accepted,
a whole area of questions she raised is clearly irrelevant, some
questions are even silly. From 1963 to 1989 there have been vast
differences of opinion as to the gravity of the ecological situation.
One may roughly distinguish between a white-out extreme optimistic
opinion, a moderate optimism, a moderrate pessimism, and a black
pessimism ('the Doomsday prophets'). The supporters of the deep ecology
movement consider that there is a grave ecological crisis, and this may
be seen as pessimism: Tremendous efforts are called for, the transition
to broad ecological sustainability will be painful for most people. The
supporters of the shallow movement tend towards optimism. Some do not
even acknowledge anything like a crisis, but support vigorous action to
investigate the ozone layer situation, to restore forests with trees
growing much faster and being more resistant to pollutants, and to do
other repair jobs.

The nearly complete lack of discussion of deep questions in the shallow
movement has as a main cause their irrelevance: why bother? Responsible
ecological policies will be implemented in due time because of the
clearly manageable magnitude of the implied problems.

When the use of pesticides increased with a large yearly per cent only
very few people were alarmed. Some were, but they found that strong
forces were against restraint. When the short range, even undesirable
consequences were clear, nothing decisive was undertaken to stop the
growth.

Few asked 'why?' and 'how?' with persistence. But those who did were
deeply concerned. The answers did not only relate to chemistry and
biology, but involved more and more of the aspects of human affairs -
economic, technological, social, cultural - and ultimately philosophical
and religious. That is, those who went deeper, both questioned deeper in
the sense of deeper premises, and suggested deeper changes socially (in
a wide sense).

The per cent increase of sheer volume of impact and the increase of
pernicious impact (special chemicals, special vulnerable regional
changes) could not and cannot be exactly measured. There is always room
for differences in degrees of optimism or pessimism. The effects of DDT
were uncertain, causes and effects of acid rain are still uncertain,
climatic changes - ice-age or warming of the planet, or both, or none? -
are uncertain. Population growth correlates with growth of wealth if
proper technology is at hand - look at the history of Holland! With high
income and education population stabilizes.

With moderate degrees of optimism the strings of 'why?' and 'how?' need
not be long. Science and technology seem to furnish answers and they do
not touch fundamental aspects of social or fundamental attitudes and
value priorities.

The difference between the deep and the shallow ecology movements may be
looked upon from a special point of view: what is questioned and how
deep does the questioning go?

The terms 'questioning' and 'questionable' are not as forceful as their
German and French equivalents problematieren, Problematizierung,
problematique etc. In European philosophy and politics in the late 60s
these terms were important - the whole industrial society was
questioned, problematiziert. The movement to protect nature was
politiziert in the sense that it had to face the economic and political
forces that would mobilize against large protection. Without political
changes there would be no shift to ecologically sane policies. In the
USA terms like 'vested interests', 'the hidden persuaders' were used,
but did not gain much influence in questions of environmentalism.

Looking at the relevant literature and public debates my conclusion is
and has long been that what characterizes the deep ecology movement (in
relation to the shallow) is not so much the answers to 'deep questions',
but that 'deep questions' are raised and taken seriously. It seems that
if the deeper questions are raised seriously, the deep ecology point of
view is accepted - more or less inevitably. The argumentation pattern
within the shallow movement does rarely touch the deeper questions, the
complete social, philosophical Problematizierung. If the supporters of
the shallow movement are invited to answer the deeper questions it is my
experience that the points of view of the deep ecology movement are
mostly accepted.[3]

From this I conclude that the view is untenable that in the ecological
crisis one is confronted with politicians and influential people with a
different philosophy of life, different view about man's place in the
cosmic scheme, who effectively work against the realization of a green
society with implied respect for the richness and diversity of life on
Earth.

The last years have seen a lively interest among religious leaders to
denounce the arrogance towards, and the ruthless exploitation of the
planet. The intrinsic value of all beings are proclaimed and Christian
leaders speak about human sinful behavior towards God's creation.

There is however one central point which this 'new green wave' on the
philosophical and religious level has not taken seriously: the necessity
of substantial change of the economic, social and ideological
structures. If the first 5 points of the 8 points are accepted such
changes are seen as necessary by most supporters of the deep ecology
movement. (Cf. point 6).

Should we then say that deeper questioning is not any longer what
fundamentally makes deep ecology argumentation patterns differ from
those of the shallow movement?

The term "fundamentally" is too strong, I think, "most clearly" is
better.

A concept of pure 'why' strings was introduced. It was used to introduce
a simple concept of 'deeper question' adapted to one of the many usages
of the term 'deeper'. There is another usage which is relevant for the
choice of the designation 'deep ecology movement', that of 'deepness of
change'. Whereas the shallow movement suggests increase of the
environmental budgets, letting the polluter pay for the pollution and
many other changes of social policies, they are not 'deep'. The programs
of green parties imply changes on a level of those implied by the deep
ecological changes.

As an example, let us consider the norm of universalizability applied to
ecological policies. Because all major ecological problems are global,
it cannot be tolerated that one society degrades life conditions very
much more per capita than others. As it is now the richest societies
degrade many times more per capita than the average. It requires
formidable changes in order to be universalizable. It is unlikely that
the population in the materially richest and most wasteful countries
will tolerate such changes without also demanding a certain decrease of
the difference of unecological behavior between the richest and the most
privileged and the poorest and most needy within those countries.

Opinions may differ about the 'ecopolitical' conditions implied by
universalizability and other norms acceptable in green societies. The
main conclusion is here in this particular context that what
characterizes the shallow ecological movement is rather the absence of
discussion of the difficult questions with which the green party
propoents wrestle, than proposing solutions, technological and
otherwise, which make it unnecessary to take up the problems.

It is now more or less generally accepted that the so-called developing
countries must find a course which combines economic growth with
ecological sustainability. In the shallow movement it is accepted that
this combination is possible and also that the development will lead
towards a material standard of living of the kind realized in the
"developed", that is, the richest countries. From the point of view of
the deep ecology movement such a development is neither possible nor
desirable. The materially and philosophically wastefulness of the rich
countries does not deserve to be taken as a universal goal, and it is
irresponsible to take it for granted that mere technological changes
could them ecologically sustainable.

This may even hold if sustainability is defined so as to make it equal
to the absence of grave general catastrophes such as are likely if the
ozone layer is destroyed or major climatic changes are produced.
Ecological sustainability from the point of view of the deep ecology
movement is more demanding. It implies life conditions such that
richness and diversity of life forms - including human cultures - are
maintained. How this kind of sustainability can be reached poses
questions discussed largely within the deep movement. In the shallow
movement they are largely ignored.

It is of considerable importance that the deep ecology movement has so
far faced no serious philosophically based criticism. There is no
contemporary systematic philosophy from which a defence of the present
unecological policies have been derived.

How would I react towards an argumentation pattern with serious
systematic philosophical derivations (from level 1), acceptance of the 8
points (at level 2), but defending at least one atrociously unecological
policy? I might class the pattern as a deep ecological argumentation
pattern! I mention this for two reasons: (1) my confidence in the
intimate relation between any great contemporary religious or
philosophical movement and the deep ecology movement, and (2) the not
too serious scandal of a defence of the above kind. Actually a case
might be found where an atrocious policy in a poor country is defended
because people have to go fast through the same stage of consumerism as
the rich. A temporary, limited policy with all the prestige of the rich
countries may help to realize sooner the idiocy of consumerism in
general.

Whatver the opinion on this rather artificial matter, the deep ecology
movement cannot of course be defined through the attribute 'deep
questioning'. What is, however, of interest, is the empirical view that
if today an ecological policy is derived from a systematic philosophical
basis, it is a policy compatible with the deep ecology movement.

Jeremy Bentham worked both as a philosopher and as a social reformer who
was not afraid of deriving very special, particular norms from general
principles, for instance which color of ballot boxes would be best. For
every British custom and legal procedure he said "Why so?" and if a
procedure did not satisfy his pleasure-principle it was to be abandoned.
That is, he questioned (problematized) every procedure in the light of
his total view, his special form of utilitarianism. Even if his way of
doing this by his special why-strings was to some degree ficticious
(like the q.e.d. in Spinoza's 'proofs'), his reform movement was highly
successful.

The ecological crisis requires analogous scrutiny 'of everything' in the
light of broad, global long range ecological sustainability. Here why-
and how-strings mercilessly confront procedures with basic principles on
the philosophical or religious level.

[1] There are many overlapping attempts to characterize the differences
between the deep and the shallow movements. Such characterizations
acquire the function of describing usages of the terms. This area of
semantics and theory of communication is not easy. Cp. my "A Note on
Definitions, Criteria and Characterizations".

[2] Bill Devall & George Sessions, Deep Ecology Salt Lake City, 1985;
Arne Naess, Ecology, Community and Lifestyle, Cambridge University
Press, 1989.

[3] A pilot study in which influential people were invited to answer
confirms my impression. More studies of this kind are highly desirable.
-- Cp. "Holdninger til mennesker, dyr og planter", Samtiden Nr.5, 1985,
pp.68-76.
