1990A

Deep Ecology and Conservation Biology

Arne Naess

In the late 1960s and early 70s many of us believed that most ecologists
would concentrate on research clearly related to the solution of the
ecological crisis. But at the universities the atmosphere encouraged
’pure’ research in the sense of research without definite practical
goals. And those who got jobs within the range of interest of big
corporations work with such goals in mind, but do rarely focus on the
crisis and rarely ’go public’.

High level ecological papers in ecological journals are mostly extremely
specialized and only remotely relevant for central critical issues. Even
the titles are mostly uncomprehensible except for a few. Those who focus
on the general crisis warned already in the early 1970s supporters of
the deep ecology movement not to expect much help from established
researchers in scientific ecology.

Then came conservation biology! It started as scientists and managers
from many quarters realized that they profited for working together to
combine theory with practice in their effort to save the planet from
further destruction. They were in a sense practitioners of ecology. They
came from ”biogeography, systematics, genetics, ecolution, epidemiology,
sociobiology, forestry, fisheries, veterinary science, resource
economics and policy, ethnobiology, and environmental ethics”.
(Conservation Biology, ed. Michael Soulé, p.5).

Conservation biology is a movement. ”The idea of conservation biology
seems to convey several things at once, including scholarship, a common
purpose, and the potential for making a significant personal
contribution to the world. For students and established scientists
alike, conservation biology seems to represent a community of
commitment, and something of value to identify with.” (Ibid.).
”Consensus can also define a discipline. Disciplines are not logical
constructs; they are social crystalizations which occur when a group of
people agree that association and discourse serve their interests.
Conservation biology began when a critical mass of people agreed that
they were conservation biologists. There is something very social and
very human about this realization.” (Soulé, p.3).

In so far as it is not a movement but a scientific discipline, it is a
crisis-science like AIDS- and cancer research. That is, it uses certain
goals and values as axioms. The intrinsic value of diversity of life
forms, the meaningfulness of a struggle to save life forms from
extinction is taken for granted independent of the usefulness of the
species for humans. Conservation biology is therefore not purely
descriptive, it is ”a prescriptive science”. (Norton, p.237).
Consequently, it is activist and personal: ”The planetary tragedy is
also a personal tragedy to those scientists who feel compelled to devote
themselves to the rescue effort. It is painful to witness so much
termination.” (Soulé, p.11).

In spite of the intense commitment to rescue the non-human world, it
sees the precarious situation of millions of people. ”For example, the
implementation of ”biosphere reserves” (UNESCO-UNEP, 1984) depends on
both a good grasp of the local biology and on the enthusiastic support
of the indigenous peoples. In fact, the survival of many natural
biological communities is going to require the creative cooperation of
biologists, social scientists, and politicians, especially in the
tropics. It won’t be long before many conservation biologists are
spending more time at community meetings than in the field or
laboratory.” (Soulé, p.11).

From all this it is clear that members of the conservation biology
community are supporters of the deep ecology movement – provided that
movement is characterized along the lines of the 8 points of the
Naess-Sessions platform. On the other hand very few supporters can boast
of being conservation biologists. Many supporters of the deep ecology
movement may be ignorant of conservation biology. They may be local
activists trying to save a small forest, say, in India.

Some supporters of the deep ecology movement are active in the efforts
to save the cultures of non-industrialized communities. The slogan
’wilderness for the people’ attests to the goals to let people in who do
not destroy or degrade wilderness and let people who already are there
remain. It is sad that some third world authors feel there is a
potential threat from ”American deep ecology” to save spectacular
animals at the expense of humans.(Guha). It must be clearly stated that
the average US life style is such that there is a near complete
incompatibility of wilderness and the US way of life. On the other hand,
decisively important fight to save what is left of US wilderness does
not teach anybody how to save Third World wilderness. Conservation
biologists in the Third World try to preserve wilderness, but in
cooperation with people who determine policies.

- Conservation biologists ’go public’. That is, they try to make people
aware of the perilous state of affairs. Here they part from the main
body of Earth scientists who tend to avoid propagating their strong view
– if they have any – in public. Why? I have made a tentative list of
reasons:

1. Time taken away from professional work.

2. Consequent adverse effects of this on promotion and status.

3. Feelings of insufficient competence outside their ”expertise”.

4. Lack of training in the use of mass media and in facing nonacademic
audiences.

5. Negative attitude towards expressing ”subjective” opinions and
valuations, or violating norms of ”objectivity” opinions and valuations,
or violating norms of ”objectivity”, reluctance to enter controversial
issues.

6. Fear that colleagues or bosses think that they dabble in irrelevant
controversial fields, and that their going public is due to vainglory
and publicity seeking.

7. Fear for fellow researchers, institution personnel or
administrations; fear for the stigma ”unscientific”. (Soulé, p.513).

One of the dangers common to the two movements is elitism. It ”lurks
whenever a field has a strong academic foothold. Whether the root of
elitism is arrogance from within the ivory tower or fear from without,
it is always a danger. There is no hiding the fact that much of the
current interest in conservation biology is occurring within academic
circles, ...” (Soulé, p.5). In the deep ecology movement it is a danger
that the small group of theorists of the movement are associated too
closely with the movement itself. It may obstruct the insight that the
overwhelming mass of supporters do not publish papers or speak over the
radio. They form the backbone of the movement. Their commitment
manifests itself in the direct actions going on all the time all over
the world. In the 1990s we need the potential activism of millions of
people who have the basic attitude of supporters of the movement.

There is another danger we have in common, ”isolation – elitism’s
child”- We should seek contact with groups competing with us in making
an impact on the public, avoiding false pretensions and sectarianism.
Some supporters of the deep ecology movement, such as myself, are
professional philosophers and theoreticians. We ask about the ultimate
premises of sayings such as ”every living creature has intrinsic (or
inherent) value (or worth)”. We may ask why it is so and what does it
exactly mean? What does it mean that we do something for its own sake,
and why should we do it? Answers differ. What is the relation of Aldo
Leopold’s criterion in his Land Ethics – A thing is right when it tends
to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the biotic
community” – to general ethics, for instance dealing with friends stuck
in the mud or babies starving? Answers differ. Nothing much comes out of
philosophical speculation according to supporters who are not inclined
to ask that kind of questions. But the less philosophically minded, not
less than the professors, somehow assume when acting in grave conflicts
their decisions must be compatible with an ultimate basis, whether
religious or otherwise. At least this is my view. We assume some kind of
’ecosophy’, some kind of wisdom, which we only are able to verbalize
imperfectly and fragmentarily. Incidentally, a recent attempt to
verbalize such wisdom is offered in Alan Drengson’s book Beyond
Environmental Crisis.

Whatever happens in the years to come, one may expect conservation
biology as a distinguished ”mission oriented crisis discipline” to
inform us of great successes as well as great failures. Let us hope the
former will color the news!
