1990.5

Comment: "Man Apart" and Deep Ecology: A Reply to Reed[1]

Arne Naess

  Peter Reed has defended the basis for an environmental ethic based
  upon feelings of awe for nature together with an existential absolute
  gulf between humans and nature. In so doing, he has claimed that there
  are serious difficulties with Ecosophy T and the terms,
  Self-realization and identification with nature. I distinguish between
  discussions of ultimate norms and the penultimate deep ecology
  platform. I also clarify and defend a technical use of identification
  and attempt to show that awe and identification may be compatible
  concepts.

1.MAN APART. A TRAGIC BEING

Among the strong, life-long critics of man's domination and exploitation
of the Earth, we find philosophers who would rather use the slogan "man
apart" than "not man apart". Two exponents of the former trend are the
outstanding Scandinavian existentialist philosopher Peter Wessel Zapffe
and the young deep ecology theorist Peter Reed.[2]

Reed begins his paper with a quote from Zapffe in which he beautifully
summarizes some of the main points of his early writings concerning the
essential suffering of all beings capable of joy or suffering, and the
terror upon terror in nature. Zapffe seems to conclude with a "no!" to
human life in this universe of death and annihilation. At the same time,
however, Zapffe expresses his awe in contemplating the serenity and
majesty of wild nature: the mountains, the ocean, the stars... . Since
the 1930s, Zapffe has written passionate and witty criticisms of man's
destruction of nature. Nevertheless, his philosophy has another side.

According to Zapffe, humans, when not distracted by all sorts of
ultimately meaningless activities, understand through their metaphysical
attitudes (e.g., the requirement of justice and the rejection of death
and utter annihilation) that they are utterly different from the other
living beings that evolution has so far produced. The human brain makes
us capable of seeing our own death and our essentially tragic position
in nature. Thus, humans are truly and radically apart, man is homeless
in nature, and since his body is a part of nature, man is even "homeless
in his own body."

Later in life, Zapffe at times did not directly advise humanity to stop
begetting children, but he expected that with increasing maturity people
would refrain from producing children in such a world. Peter Reed also
takes this more moderate position (p.66). The significance of Reed's
article is, therefore, largely independent of the question of whether
humans should disappear from the face of the Earth or not.

II. ALTERNATIVE SETS OF PREMISES

On the metalevel, Peter Reed admirably emphasizes the positive aspect of
a plurality of ultimate philosophical commitments among those who wish
to contribute to the lessening of human destructiveness on Earth. He
proposes an alternative to my version of philosophical deep ecology,
which I call Ecosophy T (Ecosophy T has as its logically ultimate norm
the one word sentence "Self-Realization!" together with the hypothesis
that identification functions "as a source of deep ecological
attitudes").[3]

Reed is of the opinion, and I am sure that he is right, that some
supporters of the deep ecology movement feel more at home with an
overall world view more in the direction of his alternative than with
Ecosophy T. They might, for example, agree with Reed that "it is our
very separateness from the Earth, the gulf between the human and the
natural, that makes us want to do right by the Earth... [where we see]
nature as a stranger... [and where we respect] values in nature that are
totally independent of what we humans think is beautiful, right and
good" (p.56). Reed holds that an appreciation of wilderness and
wildness, overwhelming complexity, the enormity of the mountains and the
oceans, and the efficiency and ferocity of the splendid, great white
shark, are values of this kind.

According to Reed, an acceptance of this kind of absolute philosophical
nature makes it unwarranted to use Self-realization as an ultimate
philosophical norm. As Reed puts it, "I hope we have not been so
mesmerized by the concept of self that we think it is the only possible
basis for an ethics" (p.68). I am sure "we" have not been so mesmerized!
Self-realization is an ultimate norm in only one kind of ecosophy
exemplified by Ecosophy T. Ecosophy T is not to be identified as "the
philosophy of deep ecology". There is no one single philosophy if, as I
use the term, a verbally articulated philosophy contains the
articulation of ultimate premises. The "eight points" of the "basic
principles of deep ecology" (or better, the "deep ecology platform"),
are, at best, penultimate.[4]

Why should we even wish to have conformity at the ultimate philosophical
or religious level? We are on the way from we know not where to we know
not where. Ecosophy T is only one of the several ecosophies inspired by
ecology and by the deep ecology movement. It need not be accepted by
everyone. Those around the world as feel that there must be deep changes
in human lifestyles and policies can be members of the deep ecology
movement without having to accept ecosophical positions which they find
confusing, don't understand, or don't feel at home with, or simply
dislike. I now do not feel at home with Reed's ultimate views, but I am
glad that they exist and their proponents are strong supporters of the
deep ecology movement.[5]

III.INTERPRETATIONS OF THE TERM IDENTIFICATION

Reed's primary concern in his paper is not the philosophy of
Self-realization, but rather the notion of identification. The term
identification as used in Ecosophy T "is rather technical, but there is
scarcely any alternative".[6] There are several roots for this kind of
use of the term.

The Social Science Context. In social science terminology one may say
that "A identifies with his corporation more strongly than with his
nation or with his family." Clearly, to make sense of this example one
must rid oneself of the association of identification with resemblance.
Furthermore, if A identifies with B, this does not weaken A's state of
individuality. A does not fuse with B. Consider another example: "We
must restore that high level of solidarity different groups of workers
exhibited thirty years ago. But what can we do when workers today
identify more closely with the middle class than with the working
class?" The personal identities of these workers are not lost whether
they identify with the working class or the middle class.

Nevertheless, acts of solidarity presuppose the process of
identification and the same holds true for acts motivated by
responsibility. In order to feel responsible for wilderness and for the
penquins of the Antractica, a process of identification is a necessary
but not a sufficient requirement. In this sense, "a process of
identification" can be defined as "a process through which the supposed
interests of another being are spontaneously reacted to as our own
interests." This definition is of course intended to cover only beings
which meaningfully, but not necessarily factually, can be said to have
interests. The term spontaneously is stressed for reasons that might be
clear from another example. If A strongly identifies with his
organization (or his wife), the question as to how and where to spend
his vacation will be answered in a way that spontaneously and implicitly
takes care of the interests of his organization (or his wife), for he is
not aware of his own interests as being potentially different from those
of his organization (or his wife).

Insofar as my terminology parallels that of the social sciences, it is
conceptually odd for anyone to hold, as Reed claims, that "some
environmentalists seem to feel more responsibility for than
identification WITH their natural surroundings" (p.68). Reed is right, I
think, as long as identification implies some kind of likeness or
resemblance as it tends perhaps to do when used in ordinary
conversation.

Alienation. The term alienation is extensively used in the social
sciences and in philosophy. For example, if it is said that A suffers
from alienation in relation to some group of people (B), or to a certain
environment, a negative feeling or attitude on the part of A may, or may
not, be implied. As I use the term alienation in Ecosophy T, negative
feelings or attitudes are not implied. Rather, I am referring to
indifference and "distance", together, implicitly, with some premises
concerning what is a normal relationship between A and B. The alienation
under discussion is usualy partial however, in the sense that the
indifference does not cover every aspect of A's relation to B. For
example, A may be alienated from his neighbors in every respect except
his interest in the amount of their income. A young person may be
alienated from his society except for several very narrow personal
concerns. As far as he is concerned, society may "go to hell" as long as
these narrow personal interests are served.

The term alienation as used tentatively in Ecosophy T is an antonym for
identification. This terminology is not very far from that of Spinoza
(and others) when using in se (in self) and in alio (in other) as an
ultimate ontological distinction that is more basic and deeper than, for
instance, the ontological distinction between substance/mode or
God/mode.

Social Self and Ecological Self. Just as social self is an important
term in William James' great work, The Principle of Psychology,
ecological self is destined to be an important term in ecosophy,[7] for
the process of identification, as interpreted above, is closely
connected with the process of the development of the ecological self. It
remains to be ascertained, however, just how closely identification and
ecological self are connected. The small child who identifies strongly
with its mother, father, and other humans also identifies just as early
with nonpersons (animals and other parts or aspects of its environment).
Gestalts are formed which bridge the alleged fundamental gulf between
humans and nonhumans.

Up to this point, the concept of a "process of identification" has been
defined only for beings who meaningfully can be said to have interests.
If there is a need to bring an essentially equivalent process under the
same heading for those beings whom we normally would not say have
interests, what can we do to satisfy this need? Two ways suggest
themselves. First, we might introduce an or saying that the term covers
beings with interests or x, introducing the appropriate term for x.
Alternatively, we could extend the denotation of interests to include x.
I choose the latter alternative. If we were to see ugly buildings or
installations on the very summit of Mount Fujijama, we would be
spontaneously repelled by them, finding that the dignity, majesty,
aloofness etc. of the mountain had been violated. In this context, it
would be in the interest of the mountain, as spontaneously experienced
by us, to retain those characteristics on which its dignity, etc., rest.
We would experience the same reaction if we saw people training an old
polar bear to dance or saw the Pope advertising for Coca Cola.

So much for the term "process of identification". An empirical study to
determine whether people become environmental activists largely through
a sense of awe or through the process of identification could scarcely,
as Reed suggests, rely on direct questions in terms of identification
(pp.68-69), for they would inevitably think in terms of resemblance or
likeness etc., rather than in terms of identification in the technical
senses discussed above.

One of the things I most deplore is the predominance of the utilitarian
attitude towards nature. This attitude encourages people to identify
with nature narrowly in terms of its usefulness to humans and it
promotes alienation from the nonhuman - alienation not only from those
aspects of nature that elicit awe, but also those that elicit compassion
for the decent treatment of nonhuman nature. A pig in a factory farm is
not treated as well as a dog who is "a member of our family." The
difference is immense. The fulfillment of potentials (of
self-realization, I would say) is taken care of to a large extent in the
latter case, but not in the former. The dignity of pigs, great
waterfalls, or mountains is not considered when narrow economic
considerations (bacon, electricity, tourism) are dominant.

IV. AWE AND SEPARATENESS

If A identifies with B, the nontechnical use of identification may lead
to the assumption that A is familiar with B and, at least sometimes,
familiarity may breed contempt. Reed points strongly to intrinsic value
of "things that awe and stupefy us", things that are dramatically
different, solidly apart, from us:

  ... it is our very separateness from the Earth, the gulf between the
  human and the natural, that makes us want to do right by the Earth. It
  seems to me that recognizing the moral distance between ourselves and
  the world helps us recognize the values in nature that are totally
  independent of what we humans think is beautiful, right, and good.
  (p.56)

Reed proposes an environmental ethic based on "awe for nature". Although
this is a possibility that certainly deserves further study, here I
limit myself to the relation of such an ethical possibility to
conceptualizations such as identification and self-realization.

In the traditional Sherpa culture of the Himalayas, the holy mountain
they call Tseringma (commonly known as Gaurishankar) is viewed with holy
awe. This feeling well suits the descriptions by Rudolph Otto and Martin
Buber of this kind of attitude. Nevertheless, the process of
identification is also strong in the Sherpa tradition: the very name of
the mountain means "the mother of the long (good) life". Although vast
snowstorms and deadly avalanches proceed from its flanks, there is till
a positive, intimate relationship between the people and the mountain.
Traditionally, people throw a little beer in the direction of the
"inhuman" mountain before drinking any themselves. The recent "conquest"
of the "mother of the long good life" by climbers, the Sherpas believe,
was disliked by her and resulted in a bad harvest. Using is in a way we
are not acquainted with in industrial societies, Tseringma is also a
beautiful princess and, of course, a mother. A community of about one
hundred and fifty people live just under the wild immense precipices of
Tseringma. For these people, or at least the older generation, it is
sacrilegious to "attack" and "conquer" Tseringma. Thus, when the
community leader asked the heads of the forty-seven families whether
they should try to protect the mountain against Western (and Japanese)
climbing expeditions, they unanimously voted for protection, despite the
vast amounts of money and goods (measured in their terms) to be gained
from such expeditions.[8] In short, for the Sherpas, there was a
relationship both of awe and identification with the mountain - humans
identifying with the nonhuman. It sounds strange and points to the
limitations of the fruitful use of the technical term in ordinary
communication. Nevertheless, in the articulation of ecosophies like
Ecosophy T, it may sometimes be of help.

Here is another example of the combination of awe and identification. A
boy about ten years old, after some years of acquaintance from afar,
starts to conceive a big mountain H as a kind of higher being, perhaps
something like a godfather. Some years later, he begins to conceive of H
as being serene, equinanimous, unruffled, strong, and great (not only
big) in contrast to his own character, which he thinks of as being
temperamental, shifting, listless, unbalanced, weak, and small. Clearly,
the boy sees the mountain as having these characteristics in sharp
contrast with himself. These characterizations of a thing that is not
"really" a person are usually called personifications or
anthropomorphisms. They are said to be "projections" from the inner life
of the boy and attached by him (like a stamp?) to the object. Yet, in
spite of its unreachableness and lack of human or animal features, the
boy conceives of the mountain as friendly and as somehow communicating
this. He would certainly, if he had the strength, defend the mountain
against any kind of destruction by fellow humans. Along the
alienation/identification axis, the boy may be said to have identified
so strongly with the mountain that the term identification in this case
requires a broader definition than the one used in previous examples
above.

What surpasses human levels may elicit awe. It need not, however, be
big. Even a leaf, an atomic structure, the smallest part of the human
body, may elicit awe. (Curiously enough, the Japanese tradition of
gardening, which concentrates on small natural "miracles", may actually
work against the efforts of a minority to save large areas of "free
nature"). If something is vast, inhuman, and utterly indifferent from
anything familiar, this does not in itself elicit awe. Nor do I see that
we are led to protect it, or even to feel an obligation to protect it,
contrary to Reed's claims. Rather, it tends to be meaningless. For
example, "friends of big numbers", such as octillions, complain that
most of their human friends find big numbers to be meaningless. They do
not elicit awe.

The feeling of one's own nothingness and insignificance may occur
consistently with feelings of nature awe, but in this case a real
difference of attitude may be important. To me, the feeling of
insignificance is transitory. The starry heavens may elicit this
combination of insignificance and awe, but during long meditations, or
several nights under the stars, an experience of expansion of the self
may be had. To block out the sight of the heavens through artificial
lights is felt by millions of people to be one of the saddest things
that has happened to industrial societies. One of the sources of
integration, of concentration on essentials, and of living at deeper
levels, is lost.

The reduction of alienation and the increase of identification are
obviously related to the process of increasing meaningfulness. If we
look for an alternative to the technical term identification, the word
meaning is worth considering.

V. A GULF BETWEEN NATURE AND ITS EVOLUTIONARY MONSTROSITY: MAN?

The separateness Reed experienced is unbridgeable: "... there is an
existential gulf of awesome depth between ourselves and the Other, a
gulf which no amount of 'identification in otherness' can span" (p.59).
Zapffe experienced this separateness in a terrifying way: he felt even
his own body to be a genuine part of nature and as such, unbridgeably
separate from him-self. He felt himself to be an evolutionary
monstrosity with metaphysical needs which nature could not possibly
fulfill. In nature, the individual human life is meaningless.

Nevertheless, Zapffe has always been a fierce opponent of the
destruction of free nature. Whatever his ultimate views, his
identification with the animal, plant, and mineral worlds has been
unusually strong and varied.[9] The essential and highly original
existentialist point of view of Zapffe may be summed up as follows:
evolution misfired when it created the human brain. The brain allows us
to contemplate life as a whole, and we necessarily ask: to what purpose?
What purpose does life serve? The valid answer "Nothing" is not good
enough. We cannot accept the meaninglessness of life as a whole. "But
what if there were no tragedies?" Not decisive. "What if there were no
excruciating pain?" Not decisive. "What if we all loved each other?" Not
decisive. The hypertrophy of our brain has made outgrow life. Leave the
Earth to beings who cannot contemplate life as a whole!

Although the idea that there is an absolute gulf between humans and
nature has not been a clearly recognizable force in the deep ecology
movement, there could be a place for it. There is, for example, nothing
in the eight points of the deep ecology platform that implies a denial
of this abolute gulf as formulated by Peter Reed or Zapffe. If it were
included, it would probably belong to "level 1" (the very ultimate norms
and hypotheses) from which the eight points may possibly follow.
Nevertheless, the particular ecosophy which has Self-realization as the
ultimate norm is incompatible with the absolute unbridgeable gulf
hypothesis (on level 1) If this hypothesis, together with a norm
supporting "awe for nature", is taken to imply a subordinate norm of
"extinction of mankind", then there is a clash with point 1 of the eight
points: the intrinsic value of the diversity of human cultures.

The idea that an absolute existential difference and apartness, as such,
a source of awe and of norms of radical protection of nature is, to me
and to many other supporters of the deep ecology movement, largely
incomprehensible, but so are many of the ideas on the ultimate level.
Differences of opinion at his level does not mean that we cannot
continue to work together, as we have worked for a long time, at the
other levels. What has the practical level to do with environmental
philosophy? In philosophy conceived of as a total view, the verbal
articulations of derived decisions in concrete situations are no less
characteristic of that philosophy than articulations of a more abstract
and general character.

[1] Published in Environmental Ethics, Vol.12, Summer 1990

[2] See Peter Reed, "Man Apart: An Alternative to the Self-Realization
Approach", Environmental Ethics II, (1989: pp.53-69.

[3] Arne Naess, "Identification as a Source of Deep Ecological
Attitudes," Michael Tobias, ed., Deep Ecology: An Anthology (San Diego:
Avant Books, 1985) pp.256-70.

[4] The deep ecology platform appears in Arne Naess, "The Deep Ecology
Movement: Some Philosophical Aspects", Philosophical Inquiry 8 (1986):
10-31; Bill Devall and George Sessions, Deep Ecology: Living as if
Nature Mattered (Salt Lake City: Gibbs Smith, 1985) pp.69-73.

[5] All of this underlines the usefulness of distinguishing the four
separate levels or components of ecosophies: the ultimate principles or
norms level, the common platform (as a penultimate "philosophy of
nature" position), the consequences of more or less general kinds, and
the level of decisions in concrete situations (the "choice points", in
the terminology of E.C.Tolman in his "Behavior Choice Point"). For a
diagram of the four levels, see Devall and Sessions, Deep Ecology,
pp.225-26.

[6] Naess, "Identification as a Source of Deep Ecological Attitudes",
p.261.

[7] The concept of ecological self is introduced in Arne Naess,
"Self-Realization: An Ecological Approach to Being in the World," Roby
Memorial Lecture, Murdoch University, Western Australia, March, 1986.
(Reprinted in The Trumpeter 4, No.3 [1987]:35-42).

[8] The petition to save Tseringma from assault was not even answered by
the Nepalese bureaucracy and the Alpine Clubs of the world showed little
interest.

[9] In his great work On the Tragic (Om Det Tragiske) Zapffe discusses
animals and other natural beings in a way that exhibits a high level of
empathy and positive identification in the technical sense.
