1991T

Spinoza and the Deep Ecology Movement

Arne Naess

I

One of the strangest tasks which a professor of philosophy can engage
in - voluntarily or more or less involuntarily - is to write a history
of philosophy. My own, about 1000 pages, is 'neither fish nor fowl'
because I could never solve the question of how to combine 'history of
philosophy' and 'history of philosophy'.

Methodology of historical research is an entertaining subject. One
learns, for instance, how a historian's account of a happening based on
only one eye witness is more detailed and written with more confidence
than the account of a happening covered by two or more witnesses. What
the witnesses have said or written normally differ so much that a highly
responsible historian's account renounces some interesting details and
is heavy reading because of 'ifs', 'perhaps', 'perhaps not', 'unclear',
'contradictory', 'uncertain', and a host of more complicated
reservations.

Philosophy of history is a discipline of another character. It has no
definite methodology: Abstract discussion on the essence of history, of
time and change, but also about the dependence of philosophy of history
upon general philosophy. Good historians often repeat that they somehow
must avoid getting influenced by any definite philosophical system. That
is impossible. In this century the vast discussion on the relation of
dialectical materialism to philosophy of history and to actual
historiography, the writings describing historical development, are at
least interesting and important as historical material on the metalevel
persuasively manifesting general philosophical positions, say those of
Aristotle, Shankara, Thomas Aquinas, Spinoza, Hegel, or Marx.

Established historians tend to say something like the following: the
historical works by the ablest historians, who are from a general point
of view more or less convinced dialectical materialists, do not reveal
the doctrincal adherence to any definite general philosophical system.
As a historian (Sverre Steen) said to his colleagues in a great humanist
faculty: 'You are fortunate: you can use your different and complicated
professional jargons, and you even improve your standing by sticking
faithfullly to them. We historians (id est, historiographers) must
somehow renounce all that.'

The historian of philosophy, focusing on general philosophy, not on
history of ideas as a part of the historiography of ideas, cannot or
should not avoid asking himself or herself: When writing an account of
the history of philosophy, from the point of view of which kind of
general philosophy do I write? In particular, what kind of a philosophy
of history, as a genuine part of general philosophy, do I subscribe to?

Obviously, my account of a philosophy, say that of Spinoza, will depend
upon my own philosophy and my own general philosophy of history, my view
of historical causality etc. Because I am not a professional historian,
I am not interested as a philosopher to hide the dependence of my
interpretation of the Ethics upon my general philosophy, including my
philosophy of history.

If there ever were a tendency of textbooks of history of philosophy
towards agreement, not to speak of an assymptotic nearness of accounts,
it would signify the disappearance of deep cultural differences, of deep
differences in Welt-und Lebensanschauungen. (I cannot avoid the German
words for this. English makes what is meant not serious, dramatic, and
world-shaking enough. 'Differences in Worldview and Life-outlook' - No.)

Because of the plurality of the basic views about what history is, and
because these views are part of philosophy, and there can be no definite
history of philosophy. We easily get into interesting logical paradoxes
if we proclaim that so and so is the only correct interpretation of
Spinoza's texts, because you need a solution of the problems in the
philosophy of history. There are different fundamental premisses of what
history is, and hermeneutics, or the philosophies of interpretation, are
many. Only if you say that only your philosophy is correct, without
reasons at all, you can proceed to offer the 'correct' view of what
Spinoza intended to say in the Ethics. A different way of saying this:
Philosophy has no definite history.

II

Which philosophers of the past deserve to be called great? This question
leads to another: Who are competent to judge? Which philosophy do we use
as a frame when answering? I belong to those who do not feel competent
to answer what even the question means, but let me use two possible
indicators of greatness.

One indicator is that of being rediscovered and highly appreciated by
successive generations of philosophers in different cultures. Another
indicator is the persistent richness and diversity of interpretations of
their texts.Spinoza's texts are constantly reinterpreted by
philosophers, poets, scientists, and others. Among the last century's
well-known influential interpretations we may mention those of Goethe
and Hegel. Among the many distinguished interpreters in this century I
do not feel competent to pick out anybody in particular. But there is an
encouraging variety. Encouraging in spite of a certain tendency to
appreciate conformity. Of course, we would like all to avoid textual and
purely factual, historical disagreement, but by interpretation, I mean
philo-sophical agreement.

In what follows I speak as a life philosopher, not as a historian. Study
of the life and time of Spinoza is essential for any close study of the
textual material, but for my purpose it can only be a necessary
instrument. Also strict systematization of Spinoza's formulations in the
Ethics, for instance, sentences such as "... means the same as..." can
only be an instrument, a methodological technique, but my background is
such that I find it natural to work systematically.

The history of interpretations of Spinoza's texts shows the intimate
relations to changing traditions. The religious character of his
philosophy makes the history comparable to what Albert Schweitzer tells
us in his History of the Research on the Life of Jesus. (Geschichte der
Leben Jesu Forschung). Four periods are fairly clear, the time soon
after Spinoza's death focussing on his atheism and his critique of the
historicity of the Bible - the work of a pioneer in this field. Then we
have the wonderful period when 'everybody' declared themselves
Spinozists - with Goethe as the greatest luminary. The period is in the
history of ideas mostly called the 'romantic' period, but it is from an
ecosophical point of view rather to be called the realistic. The Kantian
interpretation, heavily colored by its distinction dogmatic/ critical,
should be mentioned. It was a useful distinction within professional
philosophy at the time, but later it became clear that Kant introduced,
as all great philosophers do, a new form of 'dogmatism' in the sense of
proceeding from sets of unquestioned assumptions - the presuppositions
in the sense of Collingwood. Spinoza's metaphysics was interpreted by
Kantians as based on illusions. I don't think it is proper to speak of a
Kantian tradition in interpreting Spinoza. But a new period of
interpretations, alive even today, started with Hegel and tended to find
that, for Spinoza, the single, particular beings somehow drowned in the
mighty substance. The long series of modern attacks on substance started
with interpreting Spinoza as a substance-philosopher rather than a
process-philosopher, like Whitehead. 'The real is unchangeable, no
dynamism, no time.'

A fourth tradition made headway early in this century with 'the
immanence of God (and substance)' as a key expression.[1] This is the
tradition to which I belong. The most radical version might be thus
formulated: 'Without modes (singular beings) no God nor Substance'. Of
course, a tradition of interpretation includes much more than the
interpretation of the first part of the Ethics, but unfortunately, I
think, that part has been by far the most thoroughly studied within
professional philosophy.

What is the major thing to be learned from history in this case? From
the wealth of significantly different interpretations by intensely
engaged, learned Spinoza researchers? For me it primarily suggests that
new interpretations will occur in the future and that my own will only
be one of a long series - forgotten in due time. What also seems to be
learned from the history is that the interpretations ostensibly
expressing 'what Spinoza really meant', or at least suggesting this, can
be viewed as interesting reconstructions of his philosophy - interesting
because they make his texts meaningful for contemporaries of the authors
of the interpretations. Reconstructions, as here understood, take the
texts, sentence for sentence, as seriously as does the historian, and
the reconstructor is supposed to use all historical materials, but he or
she need not take seriously the question:"If Spinoza could read the
construction, what would he think of it?"

Many people who are engaged in the ecological crisis have been inspired
'by Spinoza'. They read some of Spinoza's texts or his comments on those
texts. Some even read about Spinoza himself, but this does not mean that
they try to find out exactly what Spinoza meant. Why should they? They
make use of his image and his texts in their lives. What more could or
should Spinoza expect of them?

Spinoza does not write about the beauty of wild nature. Perhaps he never
talked about it. Not about the coastline of the Netherlands, the storms,
the variety of light and darkness, the seabirds. There were people
around him, Dutch landscape painters, who appreciated all this. Maybe he
did also, but it scarcely influenced what he says in the Ethics. What he
says about animals does not suggest he had any wide or deep sense of
identification with any of them. Nevertheless his kind of philosophy of
life, its structure is such that he inspires many supporters of the deep
ecology movement.

III

One of the most inspiring aspects of the text Ethica ordine geometico
demonstrata is this: it outlines a total view. It outlines a set of
ultimate premisses in our thinking about ourselves and of the greater
reality we are part of, and he applies it to concrete situations. There
are other great thinkers who try to do the same. Aristotle, St.Thomas
Aquinas, Thomas Hobbes. Spinoza remains a unique source.

What is a total view? Here I speak of what might be

called 'a general orientation with concrete applications'.The general
orientation will include basic attitudes, and the applications are at
its most important level decisions to act

in a certain way in concrete situations. It is not a philosophy in an
academic sense. Any verbal articulation of a total view must inevitably
be fragmentary, but include praxis.

The term 'premiss' is important. The relation of premises to conclusion,
in order to be valid, must be logical at least in a wide sense of that
very ambiguous word. For reasons and through motivations historians do
not quite agree about, Spinoza chose an exposition of his total view
with great stress on the relation premiss/conclusion - analogous but not
very similar to Euclid's exposition of geometry.

In the Elements of Euclid, important and interesting

theorems occur far from the axioms. These can be modified - like
ultimate premisses in systems of formal logic. There are many options.
One need not start with a principle of contradiction. The same applies
to the expositions of the Ethics. If there seems to be inconsistencies
between a sentence in part x and one in part y, a modification of the
interpretation of the sentence in x is as relevant as that of the
sentence in y even if x has formal logical priority over y. That is,
even if x may be part of the system of premisses from which y is
derived. In what I have to say, this way of looking at formal priority
and relevance is often made use of. We must not succumb to any
irrational reverance for what is chosen as a premise. There is a
metalogical theorem that is generally underestimated: a given conclusion
y can always be derived from different sets of premisses, even rather
odd ones. For exam-ple, the conclusion 'All whales are warmblooded' can
be de-rived from premisses 'All whales are fish' and 'All fish are
warm-blooded'.

Academic philosphers are increasingly reflecting the ecological crisis
in their writings. The sources of philosophic inspirations are many: the
works of Aristotle, Spinoza, Bergson, Heidegger, Whitehead, ... .
Personally I have since I was 17 years old had a special relation to
Spinoza's Ethics, but that does not imply that I believe his work can be
of help to everybody to articulate their basic attitudes. I believe
there is need for deeply different verbal articulations of a total view,
including the poetic.

There are several terms in the Ethics which to my mind are
extraordinarily helpful when we try to express the fundamental views
which have motivated the environmental activism of some of us. I shall
in the next sections focus mainly on one of those terms, namely amor
intellectualis Dei, 'the understanding love of God'. The verb
intelligere I translate with 'understand'. The adjective intellectualis
should not be translated with 'intellectual' - a too intellectual term
today.

IV

The term amor intellectualis Dei and closely related terms, had for
centuries been theological terms within the rich tradition Spinoza
modified in his own particular direction.

Among the wise historians who have studied Spinoza, I wish to point to
Harry Austryn Wolfson. His account of the spiritual genesis of the
famous fifth part of the Ethics, 'on the power of the understanding or
on human freedom', is so far unsurpassed, as far as I know. He mentions
many authors studied by Spinoza and presumably influencing him. Among
others St.Thomas Aquinas and Leo Hebraeus. Wolfson says:

"A model classification of love in which intellectual love is included
is given by Thomas Aquinas. He distinguishes between (a) natural love
(amor naturalis) exists even in inanimate objects, (b) sensitive or
animal love (amor sensitivus animalis), and (c)intellectual, rational,
or spiritual love (amor intellectualis, rationalis, spiritualis). It is
this classification of Thomas Aquinas which seems to be the origin of
Leo Hebraeus' three-fold classification to love into natural, sensitive,
and rational and voluntary (naturale, sensitivo, et rationale
volontario). The last kind of love is also called by him mental love
(l'amore mentale), or, as in Thomas Aquinas, intellectual love (l'amore
intellettivo, intellettuale)." (Wolfson, The Philosphy of Spinoza, NY:
Ridian Books, 1958, II, pp.303-304.)

Love of God being the highest goal in the religious life of man,
Spinoza - carefully following the old tradition - furnishes this love
with an appropriate place in Part Five of his Ethics.

But does the socalled 'rationalist' system invented by Spinoza allow him
to put so much 'theology' into it? His supreme intention seems to have
been both to stick firmly to reason but nevertheless furnishes his
religious contemporaries with a strong faith as satisfactory, or more
satisfactory, than theirs. This was a project that was unlikely to
succeed as I can see. The result: a use of the term amor Dei that
certainly admits various interpretations.[2] I shall stick to my
consistently immanent interpretation of Deus and hold that amor
intellectulis is directed towards 'God, not as infinite'

(Deus non quatenus infinitus, as in 5P36.) It is directed towards
individual finite beings. My minimum thesis here is that at least for
one hermeneutially justifiable interpretation, the understanding of God,
as part of the third and highest way of cognition, is directed towards
individual finite beings. This position requires discussion of the term
Deus. I shall need to discuss the thesis of immanence before returning
to the amor intellectualis.

V

The Ethics is full of occurences of the term Deus. How is it that
Spinoza was conceived as a diabolically clever atheist? It is very
understandable. It was at his time inevitable.

God is said to be maximally perfect (perfectissimus). God is the cause
of everything, even himself. Nothing at all can be conceived except
through God. This might be thought to be enough to calm the theologians.
But they were not led astray by Spinoza's terminology. They knew, for
instance, that Spinoza was using the adjective 'perfect' (perfectus) in
an old way where it basically means 'complete'. (From Latin per - and
FAC -. See Ethics Preface, Part Four). Wolfson mentions "the original
use of the term "perfection" in the sense of "completeness" and of not
lacking anything required by one's own particular nature..." Wolfson II,
p.222-23). The nature or essence or power of the God of Spinoza is
complete to the greatest possible extent - by sheer definition. (But
Spinoza does not say anywhere that 'He' is good, and there is nothing
personal about 'Him'!)

'Perfection' is not a term which is introduced in the Ethics by means of
a separate definition. When not applied to Nature it admits of degrees.
Joy is an emotion through which mind is said to become 'more perfect'
(III P11Sch, Part Three, Scholium to Proposition 11). More whole through
more activeness and power. Whatever its connotation, 'more perfect'
cannot be separated in denotation from 'more powerful'. Compare proof of
Proposition 61: "Joy ... is the emotion through which the power of the
body to act, increases or is furthered." The relation to activeness, and
understanding is not only intimate. It is internal. The more perfect,
the more active and the less passive (Part Five Proposition 40). In
short, 'more perfect than' cannot, in denotation, be completely be
separated from a number of other basic 'in itself'-relations. Among
basic kinds of sentences Spinoza used to express his system in the sense
of interconnected set of expressions such as 'x is in itself', 'x is
conceived through itself', 'x causes y, partially or totally', 'x is
more perfect than y'. There is no place, so far as I can see, for a God
that has completely different properties from those of the 'in itself'-
family. On the other hand, the theorems 5P32-5P35 seem to me difficult
to understand from the point of view of immanence. They are too close to
transcendental religious views Spinoza entertained in his younger years.
The Ethics is not a finished work, not a crystal.

There is an expression that more than any other has supported the
concept of the immanent God: 'God or Nature' (deus sive natura).

Some Spinoza students have supposed that Spinoza simply identified God
with nature in a modern sense. This is clearly untenable, but the
expression needs discussion which will be offered in a later section.
Suffice here to mention a conclusion: the God of the Ethics may be
identified essentially with Nature-as-creative (natura naturans) - the
creative aspect of a supreme whole with two aspects, the creative and
the created - natura naturata. The latter are the existing beings in
their capacity of being there, temporarily. There is creativity but not
a creator. The verb 'to nature' (naturare) covers both aspects in its
dynamic aspect. A comparable verb today would be 'Gaia-ing', a term
suitable for those who accept the most radical versions of the Gaia
hypothesis: The planet Earth as a self-regulating living being. Clearly
such ideas are inspiring for radical environmentalists.

Immanence of God was, of course, unacceptable to contemporary
theologians. The term 'atheist' referred to the denial of the God of the
Old and New Testaments, not of every kind of God, and Spinoza was
correctly classified in their terminology as an atheist, and a
diabolical one in so far as his constant eulogy of God masked his basic
terrifying aberrations.

VI

When I contemplate the life of Spinoza I have, like many others, a
suspicion that he never completely gave up his Jewish faith, the
transcendent God he loved in his youth. As a result he may not have
managed to develop a system in which

God clearly and consistently occurs as immanent in the particular beings
we meet in our daily experience.

From God's essence follows his existence, but only 'existence' as
essence. "... God's power is nothing except God's active essence."
(2P3Sch.) Its manifestations are the 'modes', the individual beings.
This is implied by his system, but sometimes Spinoza seems to feel he
needs more of God's power than mere essence, however eternal. The
transcendent God of religion seems to appear from time to time in his
texts and threatens the consistency of his consistently philosophical
thinking and articulation. The threat is most conspicous in Part Five of
the Ethics.

It is in accordance with the immanence theory that every actually
existing being partakes in the infinite power of God. This power, the
only power that exists, is distributed unequally among natural beings,
humans being the most powerful. As we shall see, this inequality plus
the theorem of equivalence between power and right implies inequality of
right (or rights), humans having 'more right' than other beings. Without
careful delimitation of the terms potentia and ius, there is a source
here of incompatibility with certain radical environmental views.

The textual basis of the theory of immanence may be said already to
start in Part One, with 1P25 and 1P26. According to 1P36 nothing exists
from whose nature some effect does not follow. The proof of 1P36 relates
every single thing to God.

"Whatever exists expresses in a definite and determined way (P25Cor)
God's essence or nature, that is, (1P34), whatever exists expresses in a
definite and determined way the power of God,..."

The texts of the Ethics furnishes no basis for assuming that God
expresses a nature, essence, or power, in any other way than through
each existent being.[3] From this, and what is previously said, I draw
the following conclusion: Amor intel-lectualis Dei is a kind of love of
the existent particular beings, that is, parts of the total richness and
diversity of life forms on Earth, and on other regions of the universe.

In a sense God as natura naturans is nothing else than a term expressing
the unequally distributed intimately interrelated creativity manifested
by particular beings. The creativity of these beings, however modest,
justifies calling them living beings. Spinoza's socalled 'panpsychism'
does not say much more, as I see it.

Would not the above interpretation render God finite, and would it not
go directly against a way Spinoza would accept? No, because of the
infinite creative aspect of the whole which embraces natura naturans and
natura naturata. Most students of Spinoza would presumably answer in the
affirmative, but then they overlook a number of places in the text of
the Ethics. In Part Two Proposition 9, he talks about God "not as
infinite" (non quatenus infinitus). But if finite, God will have an
aspect of 'modes'? Surely Spinoza talks of the modified God (Deus
modificatus), of God being affected.[4] (See especially 2P9 and
2P11Cor). God as natura naturans doe not exist as something separate
from natura naturata.

In short, the term Deus in the Ethics has two functions: One, to point
towards an infinite whole with infinite dimensions of creativity, not in
time, but making time possible. And a second function: To point to the
manifold of finite creative beings manifesting and expressing the parts
of that whole. At least this is a way to conceive and feel what the text
of the Ethics suggests. The finite, temporal beings are creative, causa
adequatae, in so far as they are in themselves, in se.

By definition - or better, almost by definition, those who support the
deep ecology movement are, as Spinoza, in part motivated by basic
premisses of philosophical or religious kinds and feel that all living
beings have intrinsic value. It makes sense to care for these beings for
their own sake, as creative beings. Clearly they may appreciate
something like the above verbal articulations of deep attitudes.

VII

Acting with part of the power of the immanent God, and knowing their own
action, humans know God adequately. "The human mind has an adequate
knowledge (cognitio) of the eternal and infinite essence of God".
Interpretaters have difficulty here. What is 'adequacy'? If God is the
creative power completely distributed among living beings, and humans
know, are conscious of, this creativity itself, one may say that their
knowledge of God is adequate. (Cp 1P34). Since the only things to be
known as actual existing beings are the finite particular things, "the
more we understand intelligimus) individual things, the more we
understand God". (5P24)[5]

From the point of view of immanence, human understanding of the highest
"third, intuitive kind" does not only have a cognitive aspect but is
more specially a relation of love. It is a special kind of intuitive
understanding of particular things which involve an internal love
relation. The second kind, culminating in scientific knowledge, does not
have that relation to love, at least not as an internal, but only
external relations.

In his eagerness to convince his contemporaries that his philosophy
furnishes all the satisfaction of Jewish and Christian faiths, Spinoza
perhaps stretches too far. The reader easily gets the impression that a
life centered around the love of God must be a life of unworldly
contemplation, a

life different from one centering around the loving understanding of
particular things, say, like the life of Rachel Carson. Amor
intellectualis Dei implies active loving concern for all living beings.

Spinoza certainly was a socially and philosophically active person. One
need not of course be interested in, like Rachel Carson, every living
being along the shore-line, one may concentrate on humans, as Gandhi
did, but the essential point is that the third kind of knowledge
concerns particular beings, and that every one of them in a basically
egalitarian way is an expression of the immanent God, part of natura
naturans, Nature with a capital N, as well as of natura naturata.

One may say the understanding love of God, and the third (intuitive) way
of cognition, concentrates on the content of reality, not its abstract
structure.[6] The abstract structure is investigated through the second
way of cognition. Einstein and others obviously delight in God's
thoughts in the form of ab-stract, but beautiful, laws of nature.
Mathematicians delight in still more abstract structures. Spinoza,
presumably, was delighted to study Euclid. In all this reason operates,
but it is also a form of reason that leads us inevitably to the third
kind of cognition (5P28): The third way is rational in the sense that
reason and reason alone leads us to this third way.

A supremely important rule which fits neatly in with the deep ecology
slogan 'rich life with simple means!' has to do with the functin to
reason as a servant of the third way: What is done that is not in
harmony with ultimate goals of life cannot be reasonable. It is not
enough to be reasonable and effective as means towards a subordinate
goal. One must ask: Is this subordinate goal consistent with, or better,
conducive to, the realization of ultimate goals - situations with
meaning in themselves?

Love of the immanent God is love of God's expressions, not of a
separable God. A being expresses God's nature or essence, therefore love
of God cannot be different from love of such a being. But what is God's
nature or essence? Proposition 34 in Part One answers: "God's power is
God's essence itself" - as already said. In the proof Spinoza says that
through God's power God and every being exist and act more or less
freely. Because God is not separate from God's expressions, causality
from God to God's expressions is immanent, not the causality of our
natural science. When a human loves God 'intellectually', it cannot be
but a love of one expression directed towards another expression as an
expression of God and as such of intrinsic value.

There is basis for assuming that the particular beings understood the
third way are understood in the light of a great, infinite whole, the
creative aspect of that whole. The general structure of the Ethics is
such that what is said about humans basically is applications of what is
said about beings in a fairly general sense. Note the use of
'consequently' (consequenter) in the proof of Proposition 4 in Part
Four:

"The power through which particular beings, and conse-quently humans,
conserve their being, is God or Nature's power itself, not in so far /
God or Nature / is infin-ite, but in so far / God or Nature / can be
explicited through human actual essence."

Supporters of the deep ecology movement like to say that they support
ecocentrism, not anthropocentrism, and Spinoza certainly offers high
level premisses for what has sometimes been labelled biocentric or
ecocentric egalitarianism. I think these Latin/Greek terms are useless
in serious discussions, but they may be helpful in offering some vague
idea of a kind of basic attitude. Spinoza tried something immensely
difficult, namely to articulate with some preciseness certain basic
attitudes.

What Spinoza's wholism, implied - vaguely implied? - all through the
Ethics, is secured through his use of the term God, and by the
generality of its theorems. There is a sen-tence in his work On the
Improvement of the Understanding that many people try to use as a key to
the understanding of Spinoza's system: He says explicitly that he
strives to attain a stable mental state characterized by the knowledge
of the union that the mind has with the whole of nature. Together with
others, not alone: "to strive that many acquire it with me". He
envisages a society conducive "to the attainment of this character
(state) by the greatest number with the least difficulty and danger." It
necessitates a healing of the way we understand things. A way of caring
understanding? In a sense a movement towards 'green communities'? At
least not incompatible with such a movement. Of course, if supporters do
find something inspiring here, it is not in the belief that Spinoza as a
person would be supporting what they do, but a kind of philosophy like
his could support.

VIII

'But is the foregoing the most plausible interpretation of the text of
the Ethics?'

There cannot be any most plausible interpretation of the Ethics.
Hermeneutics, as I understand it, precludes that. My job amounts to a
reconstruction of parts of the system rather than to find out exactly
what the complex person Spinoza in a certain period of his life intended
to mean by his words and sentences in that period. The development and
structure of the text of the Ethics are very complicated, to say the
least. A good impression of this we get through reading the excellent,
but formidable volume written by M.Gueroult on how to interpret Part
One - one fifth - of the Ethics. (Spinoza I: Dieu, Paris 1968.) It is
difficult for the reader to 'feel at home' with Spinoza at such a level
of complication. The whole is lost. The level of complication of some of
the fugues of Sebastian Bach does not destroy the possibility of their
being experienced as an integrated whole. He was a genius, as was
Spinoza. The fugues are short, the Ethics is short. (Written in terms of
M.Gueroult the Ethics would at least be 10 times as long.)

A question arises here: When do we write about Spinoza as a professor of
academic philosophy and when do we write as philosphers on our own -
however modest in our pretensions of originality? The great philosophers
we write about in our textbooks of the history of philosophy inspired
each other often in a negative way: They felt a contrast and a need to
articulate their own vision. Their freedom, or licence, of
interpretation of the others is astonishing from an academic point of
view. The way leading Stoics interpreted Epicureans and vice versa, the
way Hegel interpreted Hume, Marx and Kierkegaard interpreted Hegel, Kant
interpreted Hume, Heidegger interprets metaphyics - do scarcely bear
pedestrian academic scrutiny. Kant would probably have flunked any
current university examination on Hume. He read very little, and ignored
The Treatise on Human Nature. Undergraduates could have corrected him.

I am not defending onesidedness and wildly implausible interpretations,
but I am insisting on the supreme value of working out things under the
inspiration of the texts. As philosophers, it is our obligation to try
out tentative answers to the questions we find urgent and inevitable to
answer. This means ultimately to work out reconstructions rather than
detailed interpretations of the great philosphers. Gueroult should be
studied carefully, but he cannot function as a guru.

Philosophical and religious sources have played and will continue to
play a role in environmental activism. The close relation to decision in
concrete conflict situations precludes highly technical and complicated
interpretations. One of the most characteristic, short answers to the
question 'Why is it so important to protect so-and-so from extinction
here in your neighborhood?' runs like this: 'They belong here.'

IX

In the deep ecology movement, like in the two other great contemporary
movements, the peace movement and the social justice movement, progress
is in part dependent upon active participation of a minority who is able
to use part of their time and energy to serve a great cause. Reliable
news about ecological crisis is nearly always bad. It is difficult not
to get frustrated and join the many who passively deplore the
destruction that is going on. Among the many sources of inspiration to
enter and continue activism we have at our disposal the teaching of
Spinoza.

Activeness - a better term than 'activity' - makes for joy, according to
Spinoza. It expresses the nature of the active being, the being as far
as it is in itself (in se), and the more direct it expresses its unique
nature, the greater the joy. Sorrow is due to passivity, lack of active
expressions. There is an accident, you spontaneously engage all of
yourself, wholeheartedly, and your own pain is not felt, there is a joy
if the activeness is intense and comprehensive. The grave frustration
and sorrow felt by millions in the present situation on Earth can be
overcome, and is being overcome, by jointly entering into active
relations, taking part each according to his own capacity and special
interest. In the deep ecology movement the activeness is supposed to be
directly motivated by the ultimate attitudes towards life and
meaningfulness. ("Level 1"). An activeness that follows from our very
nature as a whole.

Crucial from a systematic point of view is here the definition of
activeness in Part Three of the Ethics:

"I say we act, when something in us or outside us happens, of which we
are adequate cause, that is (according to the foregoing definition) when
something follows in us or outside us from our nature, something that
can only be understood clearly and distinctly from it alone..."

The term 'alone' is crucial here. It is a supreme manifestation of
freedom and creativeness. When we are active and free (liber) in this
way, we are determined in our action by our (innermost) nature. We do
something that is determined, completely determined, but freely, because
determined by our own particular, unique nature. We do it exercising
part of the power of God or Nature. And we cannot escape being joyful,
whatever the tragic circumstances. The whole Part Five centers on how
this activeness or freedom can be expanded, increased, and deepened. No
freedom without activism, no activism without freedom.

In the expression Deus sive Natura - nature written with capital N - the
connotation of the two words is not the same, but the denotation is.
There are not two separate entities, two existent somethings, not even
one. Sameness of denotation does not imply general substitutability, of
the two terms, but sometimes substitution offers new insights. Let us
substitute 'Nature' for 'God' in Proposition 15, Part Five:

"He who clearly and distinctly understands himself and his affects,
loves Nature, and the more so the more he understands himself and his
affects."

It is the passive affects, hatred, jealousy, baseless hope, mindless
anger or sorrow (tristitia) that are the obstacles, the immaturity of
humans.

The same substitution makes the introductory passage of the proof of
Proposition 20 run as follows:

"This love of Nature is the highest good we can strive for in harmony
with the dictate of reason, and it is common to all humans, and we
desire that all would enjoy it."

We cannot, of course, identify Nature (with a capital N) with the set of
particular physical and non-physical things, including suffering humans
and animals. Such an atomistic view forgets that natura naturans and
natura naturata together make an integral whole: the creative and the
created are internally (insolubly) related. We are not invited to love
the cruelty in nature.

Gestalt thinking and the concept of 'internal relations' are useful in
making precise the interconnectedness of parts and whole. But I cannot
go into this here.

Every single being deserves understanding love - this can be plausibly
inferred from theorems in the Ethics. But Spinoza, as other great
philosophers, changed attitudes and terminology through the years. In
the Ethics there are still passages suggesting that the unchanging,
permanent, eternal is the supreme and the most satisfactory as object of
love and veneration. Thus a sequence of theorems in Part Five from
theorem 17 and onwards seems to belong to a fairly early period of
Spinoza's thinking. Love of God was in the early periods probably seen
in contrast to love of finite, 'mortal' particulars. In some sections of
Part Five, love of God is still somewhat similar to the love of a
transcendent God, a God that has a power of His own, beyond and apart
from the limited power of individual beings.

Let us substitute 'God or Nature' for 'God' in Part Five, the Proof of
Proposition 17:

"The highest virtue (virtus) of the mind is to understand God or Nature,
or to understand beings in the third way."

The translation of virtus with 'virtue' is today misleading. There are
not one-word translations available. The term has to do with capacity,
like the Greek aretè. Spinoza shuns moralizing.

Some might say: Spinoza wishes to contribute, as a green activist, to
organize people and to contribute, using nonviolent means, to the
establishment of a green society. The consciousness of the members will
be characterized by awareness of their unity with nature and live
according to that insight.

This is going too far. But clearly the words of Spinoza do not diminish
the feeling that a total view having important analogies to that of
Spinoza is compatible with contemporary total views in part inspired by
the ecological crisis, that is, analogous to an ecosophy.

What would Spinoza in heaven say to this? Perhaps he would make a
scornful remark. But his personal applause is not necessary for us.

The very famous passage in his early work on human understanding, more
specially the utterance about the union of the mind with nature as a
whole, has led many to interpret Spinoza as an advocate of unio mystica,
that is, as a 'mystic'. In the Ethics, on which I am focusing, there are
no similar utterances. I find it plausible that he in his later years
has experienced less mystical nearness to a supreme whole.

Nature as conceived by many ecologists and expressed philosophically by
James Lovelock and others, is not the passive, dead, value-neutral
nature of mechanistic science, but is akin to the active, 'naturing'
nature of Spinoza. It is all-inclusive, creative (as natura naturans),
infinitely diverse, and is alive in the broad sense of Spinozistic
socalled panpsychism. It manifests abstract structure, namely the laws
of nature, simulated by such models as Einstein's field equations.
Goethe reaches deeper, perhaps, when he warns us: "Die Natur hat weder
Kern noch Schale, alles ist auf einem Male".

Because 'Everything affects every other thing', we cannot predict the
long range effects of our particular actions and policies. This is in
harmony with Spinoza's warning that we should not think man capable of
ever fully understanding the 'common order of nature'. Very much less is
needed in order to appreciate the overwhelming creativity of Nature. The
practical importance of the intrinsic-value principle of deep ecology is
mainly due to the imperfection and fragmentariness of our knowledge of
the common order of nature. Calculations of 'usefulness' are uncertain.

X

Nature (with a capital N) is intuitively conceived as perfect in the
sense that Spinoza and ecologists hold more or less in common. It is not
a narrowly moral, utilitarian or aesthetic perfection. Nature is perfect
'in itself' and not in so far as it serves specific human needs. Nor is
it moral or immoral. It is amoral.

'Perfection' in Spinoza's medieval Latin means completeness of some
sort. But suffering in nature? There is no reason to deny or
underestimate it. Its relation to perfection? Neither should it be
overestimated. Stephan Lackner[7] has published a highly stimulating
book concerning that. Some ecologists seem to ask us to completely
refrain from intervention in order to help needlessly suffering animals.
But as humans we have obligations, primarily towards suffering humans,
but also towards non-human beings. There are of course inevitable
clashes of norms in this area, but some norms in the sense of general
guidelines are fairly clear. We may refuse to passively witness what we
consider unnecesary suffering. The predators kill, but we are free to
intervene in some cases.[8] I don't know how the text of the Ethics may
lend itself to thisquestion of the deep ecolog movement.

XI

Spinoza makes use of all central philosophical terms of his time but he
defined them in his own way, and he has the tendency to relate to each
of them to each of the others in a characteristic way. Without studying
that very special way, I do not think one can get any adequate picture
of his system. To act in the sense of expressing one's own nature, is to
act freely, determined only by one's own nature and not arbitrarily or
by chance. But, of course not determined in the sense of fatalism.

An act causes something adequately, and every being causes something
this way. That is, every being shares, as we have pointed out earlier,
in the creativity of God or Nature. Every being is not wholly in
something other (in alio) in the terminology of Spinoza. Power is power
to act, that is, cause adequately, and an increase of this cannot but
increase the level of virtue. (Here Spinoza fundamentally differs from
Hobbes.) The relation of virtues to other key terms is fixed through 17
equivalences.[9]

In contemporary philosophy of politics, it is often distinguished
between 'power over' ('coercise power') and 'power to'. Spinoza's term
is clearly a kind of 'power to'-term.

To be, and therefore to act, in one self (in suo esse) is one of the
basic notions in the Ethics and it has a clear connection with
self-preservation. But Spinoza prefers for important reasons a different
term, 'perseverare in suo esse'. The relation of the ecosophically
important notions of self-realization to the Spinozist perseverare
justifies a closer inspection of terminology and the significantly
different concepts at hand.

The principle of self-preservation as exemplified and as defined by
philosophers and biologists at least since the Stoics had a main
component of defense against external threats. But it also covers
behavior and structure adopted to maintain inner equilibrium under
changing environmental conditions. Conceived in this way the principle
has acquired renewed importance through the deep ecology movement.

The notion of 'persevere in one's (particular) being' is useful in
argumentation against arbitrary manipulation of genes in animals and
humans. The usual more or less 'instinctive' reluctance to interfere
with the particular beings developed through millions of years may find
philosophical justification at this point. Affinities between Stoic
philosophy and deep ecology attitudes have been often noted, but the
differences are clear: the latter implies social and political activism
directed towards conditions significantly different from those in all or
most countries. There is no quietism, and no lack of passion in the deep
ecology movement. In so far as it has affinities with Spinoza, it favors
the strong positive emotions required for the advance in the level of
freedom. But, of course,most supporters of the movement have never heard
about Spinoza, and some might dislike what they hear.

The increased level of perseveration seems to be proportional to the
increase in all 8 or more in-se predicates: power, freedom, virtue... .
The expression quantum in se est, 'in so far (the being is in itself)',
is central, not only in the Ethics, but also in the Theological-
Political Treatise: "It is a law of all nature (or: a highest law...)
that every being endeavors (conatur) to persevere in its state, in so
far as 'it is in itself'. (TTP, Cap.16) The translation 'to pre-serve'
is misleading.

The dictionary meaning of the English term 'persevere' Wyld formulates
as follows:

to persist doggedly and with determination, diligence and patience, with
the object a) of completing a task; b) of overcoming difficulty or
opposition; c) of attaining a purpose, securing an aim etc.

The classic Latin term perseverare C.T.Lewis translates with "to abide,
adhere strictly, continue steadfastly, persist, persevere". Example:
navis perseveravit, "the ship

kept on its course". We choose the course and persevere.[10]

The term perseverare in the Ethics must of course be conceived more
abstract and general, but I think the English term furnishes an adequate
basis. The dynamic character of Spinoza's thinking is, for instance,
better served than by "preservation" or by "conservation".

Human power to act is proportional to the extent to which we are the
adequate cause of something, which again, according to the definition of
adequate causation, is porportional to the extent to which what is done
follows from our nature or essence alone, and not from any pressure upon
us. When we act in the sense introduced, we persevere in our being or
essence. A thing that perseveres in its being "in so far as it is in
itself" perseveres in its essence.

'To persevere one's being' is the same as 'to persevere in one's
essence' and not to persevere in someone else's essence, says Spinoza.
Altruism in the sense of caring for others or doing things for the sake
of others does not imply

shedding one's essence and jumping into the essence of some-thing else.
A being is the more free the more it acts out, or is caused by, its own
nature alone. It is a question of maintaining identity, not of
strengthening ego or egocentricity. The doctrine of Spinoza at this
point with its undermining of the standard conception of altruism
furnishes an excellent kind of basis for a deep ecology concept of
identification with every living being. I say 'kind of' because of the
opportunity of a variety of conceptualizations.

The term perseverare acquires its function from its position within a
structure that is unique to Spinoza's system and different from the
function of related terms in other philosophers. But it would lead us
astray if we adopted 'self-perseverance' as a fundamental term of
Spinoza's system. No single term is fundamental in his system. There are
at least a dozen, which are ultimates from a systematic point of view.
Therefore we cannot overemphazise the importance of keeping their
internal relations of a manifold of terms in mind. If not, the system
falls apart - a disorderly heap of postulates.

Taken at its crudest form - the endeavor to continue somehow to survive,
is of little systematic interest. And taken to imply a resistance to
change - a striving to keep on just as one always has done, it is
clearly un-Spinozistic. There is an urge for change. Humans, and others
are always 'on the way' - without change of essence. The dynamic,
interactionist view of the self makes it inevitable to interpret a basic
principles of conatus as a striving for self-causing-ness, activeness,
power. We might connect it more specifically with the striving for
perfection, for whole-ness, completeness, self-madeness, as suggested by
the special use of the term in the Ethics. The use of conatus in
Proposition 28, Part Five, is instructive:

"The conatus or desire to understand things in the third way of
cognition...". Love of particular beings, amor intellectualis, is not a
luxury indulged by the few, but a bone-hard human reality.

The proof of Proposition 20 in Part Four offers an excellent occurence
of grading conatus, perseverance, conservation, power and virtue:

"Virtue is the very power of man, and is defined solely by the essence
of man, that is, which is defined through solely the striving by which
man strives to preserve in his being. Therefore, the more each strives
to conserve his being, and is able to do so, the more he is endowed with
virtue. And as a consequence, to the extent a man neglects to conserve
his own being, he is wanting in power." And of course wanting in virtue.
One is reminded of the Greek term arete, conventionally translated to
'virtue', whereas it lacks the specific moral atmosphere of 'virtue'.
Spinoza's anti-moralistic attitude may remind one of that of Hobbes, but
not the general gentleness and in a wide sense ethical approach. In the
ecosophy I feel at home with, a fundamental norm can be formulated using
one word, 'Self-realization!'. The nearest term in the terminology of
the Ethics, 'to persevere in one's self', can be interpreted in the
direction of 'express one's self', 'self-fulfillment', 'realizing one's
potentials' - 'self-realization'.

The self can be said to comprise what one identifies with. The
identification may be superficial or deep, the scope of identification
narrow or broad. The person, I suggest, who is 'all-round' mature cannot
avoid identifying with every living being - 'seeing himself or herself
in every being'. If the two persons are Anne and Tom Taylor evidently
they do not see Anne and Tom in every being. There is something they see
in themselves and in any other being. What something? It is tempting to
mention one particular metaphysical theory specifying the x. I refer to
Bhagavadgita's announcement: "Those who are equipped with yoga looks on
all with an impartial yee, seeing Atman (the Self) in all beings and all
beings in Atman." Chapter 6, verse 29, Gandhi's translation.)

- Nine out of ten news about the ecological crisis are potentially
discouraging. It is therefore understandable that some young supporters
of the deep ecology movement despair, grow pessimistic and increasingly
passive. This in spite of their feeling of certainty that the goal of
the deep ecology movement is in harmony with what they fundamentally and
intuitively stand up for: They try to 'persevere in their being, in so
far as they are in themselves', that is, in so far as they are able to
act as integrated, powerful people - in the Spinozistic sense of
'power'.

XII

People motivated by the positive (active) affects and not by the
negative (passive) ones have the same ultimate aim, taking part in the
same highest virture of the mind (Part

Five, Proposition 25, Proof), and are therefore capable of joining
together in peaceful communities. The stronger these

joyful affects are, the better. Spinoza is a rare bird among
philosophers: he makes significant advance along the road to freedom
dependent upon strength of positive feelings! Reason points out the way
to go, but only the strength of the feelings can do the job, to travel
along a long, difficult trail, each in a separate trail (svamarga),the
way of one's own self).

There are - perhaps I should add 'of course' - some sentences in the
Ethics which are difficult to digest for supporters of the deep ecology
movement. A passage in Part Four (P37Sch) seems to rely on a curious
theorem: The less the nature of people is similar, the less easy it is
to live together, and the less they are useful to each other. This I
think, can be inferred from what he says about the nature of different
living beings. From such a point of view he talks about animals which
have feelings, he says, but have such a very different nature from ours
that they cannot be our friends and members of our communities. He does
not say that because they are inferior or lower that they cannot be our
friends. Their nature is too different.

Part of what Spinoza says in this connection is different from what
supporters of the deep ecology movement tend to say. What I refer to is
the expression of Spinoza when he says that animals have the same right
in relation to humans as humans have in relation to animals, but that
humans have more right than animals. Many supporters of the deep ecology
movement say that animals have as much right as humans. There is an
equality of right.

I tend to disagree with any quantification here. Animals and humans may
be said to have at least one kind of right in common, namely the right
to live and blossom. The concept I prefer if I use the term 'right' in
this connection is such that it does not warrant quantification. If I
intentionally kill a mosquito, I violate its right, but not because I,
as a human, have more right. If Spinoza relates to another being with
amor intellectualis can he nevertheless deny doing things for their own
sake? In modern terminology, intellectual love would not imply the
attributing intrinsic value, but that is irrelevant here. Spinoza does
not use the term right in such a way and he cannot avoid quantification.

I find it strange that some people seem to find it paradoxical that
theorists of the deep ecology movement tend to cherish Spinoza: He talks
about animals with so little respect. But the inspiration does not
depend on reading texts as a holy scripture. We do not expect him to be
influenced by at least some of the dominant opinions among his
contemporaries. We have the right to treat animals "as is most
convenient for us", he writes in one of his 'notes', not as part of a
theorem. But if some of use have advanced further than some others among
us on the way towards the application of the third way of knowledge,
amor intellectualis, the third way will have priority over conveniences.
Animal factories which violate the dignity of animals cannot be operated
in conformity with the active affect.

There is among Spinoza's terms none that corresponds to the important
term '(process of) identification' by which humans attribute intrinsic
or inherent value to every human being and also to large sections, or
all, non-human beings. The structure of his system is such that all
beings take part in the power of God. Because of the equivalences
joining 'power' with other terms, the structure is compatible with the
intrinsic value and the self-realization views. The content of the note
attached to Proposition 37 of Part Four is not. For my use of this note
in Spinoza's text it is enough to add to it: what partakes in the
creative power of God has intrinsic value and this applies to the total
manifold of creatures. In this way the passage from the basic ("level
1") announcements of Spinoza to the ("level 2") 8 points of my proposed
8 points of the deep ecology movement is not difficult.[11]

Supporters of the deep ecology movement have been increasingly involved
in social and political conflicts. Since the controversies on
pesticides, the pervasive influence of social and political obstacles
have made supporters more pessimistic about the near future. The
question must here be raised: Can something be learned from 17th century
Spinoza about the 20th Century frustrating political situation? Not very
much, I am afraid.

The understanding of Spinoza's political opinion is clearly dependent
upon what he says in the Ethics and other works, and upon the special
social and political conditions in the Netherlands at that time. I shall
here limit myself to some remarks on the relations between the Ethics
and his social philosophy in so far as they are fairly independent of
the special conditions in his time. They concern primarily some of the
central terms mentioned in the foregoing.

Adequate ideas are only available through the second and third kinds of
cognition, the rational and the intuitive. These two kinds do not get
into conflict, but the rational teaches us only what is required in our
quest to understand in the third way, that is, ultimately what is
necessary individually, socially, and politically, to reach a peaceful
community.[12]

But the social situation shows how far from reaching utopia we are: Most
people are, according to Spinoza, led by passive rather than active
affects, and they choose leaders who seem to help them reach goals
derived from these passive affects. This means that even a democracy may
fail to change policies.

Spinoza grew increasingly pessimistic. He changed opinions during the
long time he was working on the manuscript of the Ethics. The last time
was in 1674, two years after the politically catastrophic year of the
assassination of Jan de Witt. Spinoza was politically active and the
depressing events of 1672 may have changed some of his ideas - he was
led towards general pessimism about the future. But it did not influence
the main structure of the Ethics, the propositions and their proofs. It
is more likely that it affected some of the notes (Scholiae) put in
between the Propositions.

It is not the personal opinions, but the main body (and the general
structure) of the Ethics which has inspired, and will in the future
inspire those who, on the basis of their fundamental beliefs and
attitudes, try to contribute, however modestly, to the solutions of the
ecological crisis. It is clear to those who teach Spinoza at the
universities that the appeal of Spinoza is close to universal. It is not
astonishing that he is sometimes called THE philosopher.

Spinoza had a vision, a small set of intimately connected deep
intuitions. He clearly saw that to convey the content of his vision, and
of all main views dependent on it, it would not be possible to use a
small number of words. The arugmentation in the Ethics uses many words
and many levels of the premiss/conclusion relation. The intimacy of the
relation between the key terms enables the careful reader to get a
feeling of the basic intuitions he tried to elicit in us.

[1]     Spinoza uses the term causa immanens only twice, in the Ethics
1P18 (Part One, Proposition 18) and Letter 73 when there is a positive
reference to St. Paul.

[2]     Naess, "Limited Definiteness of 'God' in Spinoza's system.
Answer to Heine Siebrand", Neue Zeitschrift für sytematische Theologie
und Religionsphilosophie, 28, 1986, pp.275-283.

[3]     One may speak of the finite God (Deus modificatus) of Spinoza as
well as aboout the infinite: Naess: "Spinoza's Finite God", Revue
internationale de Philosophie, Vol. 35, 1981, pp.120-126. Researchers
mostly take the first part of the Ethics more seriously than the last -
the account of human freedom and power as genuine part of God's. Doing
this they seem not to be aware of the limitation of mere formal logical
priority. They ignore Deus modificatus because it occurs only in the
later parts. Deep ecology theorizing neither thrives on Man apart, nor
God apart.

[4]     Cp.Naess, "Spinoza's Finite God", Revue internationale de
Philosophie, 135, 1981, pp.120-126.

[5]     It is important that Spinoza adds that 5P24 follows from
1P25Cor, that is, from the thesis of modes expressing God's attributes.
It supports a radically immanent interpretation of Deus.

[6]     The distinction between content and abstract structure is worked
out in Naess, "The World of Concrete Contents", Inquiry, 28, 1985,
pp.417-428.

[7]     Lackner, Stephan, Peaceable Nature, San Francisco:Harper & Row,
1984.

[8]     A little more on human intervention to decrease suffering:
A.Naess, "Should we try to relieve clear cases of extreme suffering in
nature?" in Pan Ecology, Vol.6, Number 1, Winter 1991.

[9]     In Naess, Equivalent Terms and Notions in Spinoza's Ethics,
Institute of Philosophy, University of Oslo 1973, I have guoted 243
relations of equivalence among key terms.

[10]     I have commented on perseverare and its relation to Hobbes in
"Environmental Ethics and Spinoza's Ethics...", Inquiry, 23, 1980,
pp.313-325. In what follows, some formulations are borrowed from that
article. In the fourth part of the Ethics, the term conservare is
sometimes used as a synonym for perseverare. (4P18Sch: reason demands
(postulat) that everyone endeavors to conserve its being (esse), in so
far as it is in itself.) I think 'conserve' is too passive, I shall
accordingly write and talk as if perseverare was used consistently by
Spinoza.

[11]     Bill Devall & G.Sessions, Deep Ecology, Salt Lake City 1985,
p.70.

[12]     Some central places in the Ethics show the way from Spinoza's
Ethics to his political writings. Concerning reason: Part Two,
Proposition 40, Scholium 2. From the terminology follows Proposition 35
of Part Four: "In so far men live under the guidance of reason, to that
extent only do they always agree in nature". This is queer if one does
not take into account Spinoza's somewhat special use of the term ratio.
Concerning freedom, reason, mutual aid, peace, and friendship: "Only
free men are truly advantageous (invicem utilissimi) to one another and
united by a maximally close bond of friendship." (Part Four, Proposition
71, Proof.) Here the term 'freedom' must be interpreted in accordance
with what is said about adequate causation and activeness (Part Three,
Definition 2), and the resulting close relation between the terms
'freedom' and 'reason': "A free human being, that is, a man who lives
under the guidance of reason, ..." (Part Four, Demonstration of
Proposition 67.)

From these places it is fairly clear that a Spinozistic social utopia is
one which is conceived to furnish the best conditions for freedom for
everybody - 'freedom' being interpreted in his way. But what kind of
practical politics in the best? The question is open. I don't think
Spinoza's political work can offer much here.
