1991.AA

The Deep Ecology Movement and Hitler's veneration

of Cruel Nature[1]

Arne Naess

The historical roots of the deep ecology movement in the
English-speaking world - notably USA, Canada, Australia and Great
Britain - is such that to find a connection with national socialism as
we know it in the German-speaking world before the Second World War is
far-fetched. It is understand-able, however, that in Germany many things
said by supporters of the movement may elicit uneasy feelings: was not
some of these things said by the Nazis? Is there not a possibility of a
dangerous development in the future of the movement? It is reassuring
that the institute of deep ecology in Munich reports that there is now,
in 1994, no suspicion about a dark connection with Nazism.

The radical environmental journal Earth First! in many years specialized
in a "man in the street" style and let supporters of the journal - not
to be confused with the movement Earth First! - free access to air
opinions scorned by "everybody", that is, every "properly educated" in
the the West. Thus there was an (anonymous) somebody who wrote that it
would be better to let emaciated Ethiopian small children die. Worse:
perhaps AIDS is nature taking over the population problem, and perhaps
we should let it do so. Certainly some of the people who, for instance,
accept the 8 points I think characteristic of the supporters of the deep
ecology movement, have in my view ethically unacceptable opinions on how
to help stabilize the population and also on other matters. During the
Cold War it was felt by many to be highly embarrassing when communists
or "leftists" supported your cause. The same holds now in relation to
the deep ecology movement. There are opinions explicitly announcing as
deep ecology opinions which the vast majority of the supporters ignore
or find embarras-sing. I do not think it wise to try to define "deep
ecology" in such a way that such opinions cannot possibly be called
compatible with being a supporter.

Let us take the example of emaciated Ethiopian small children. Some
doctors from the West who have been in Ethiopia and have saved small
children from death or at least postponed it, maintain that in many
cases it would have been better for the children to die, but that the
anguish of the parents and the occupational principles of doctors make
it impossible only to consider what would be best for the children. For
doctors to have such an opinion is ethically unobjectionable, but it is
a very different thing for a non-involved person to at least indirectly
suggest a different policy. The situation is in some ways similar to the
situation in the late 40s when some people wrote that the Jews could
have fought back more efficiently during the Hitler period. If Jews who
went through those years in Germany and took part in the suffering,
aired such opinions, they were considered worthy of debate, but scarcely
if the debater had only distant relations to anything going on in Nazi
Germany.

As an anticipation of the main conclusion I shall invoke the idea of
"the three great contemporary movements" - the peace movement, the
social justice movement, and the deep ecology movement. There are and
will continue to be people heavily engaged in one of the movements who
ignore the others. One might in some such cases criticize opinions for
their incompatiblity with common tenets of two of the movements. People
who seem to advocate a policy protecting spectacular animals rather than
hungry children we may criticize for their neglect of the peace or the
social justice movements.

Let us then inspect some acknowledged descriptions of the contrast
between the shallow (or reform) ecology movement and the deep ecology
movement. As an example I shall use the so-called "8 points of the deep
ecology movement", a tentative formulation of views which supporters of
the movement seem to have in common on a fairly general and abstract
level.

1. The well-being and flourishing of human and non-human Life

on earth have value in themselves (synonyms: intrinsic value, inherent
value). These values are independent of the usefulness of the non-human
world for human purposes.

2. Richness and diversity of life forms contribute to the realization of
these values and are also values in themselves.

3. Humans have no right to reduce this richness and diversity except to
satisfy vital needs.

4. The flourishing of human life and cultures is compatible with a
substantial decrease of the human population. The flourishing of
non-human life requires such a decrease.

5. Present human interference with the non-human world is excessive, and
the situation is rapidly worsening.

6. Policies must therefore be changed. Those policies affect basic
economic, technological, and ideological structures. The resulting state
of affairs will be deeply different from the present.

7. The ideological change is mainly that of appreciating life quality
(dwelling in situations of inherent value) rather than adhering to an
increasingly higher standard of living. There will be a profound
awareness of the difference between big and great.

8. Those who subscribe to the foregoing points have an obligation
directly or indirectly to try to implement necessary changes.

It is primarily the first and the last points which are relevant.
Cultural differences among humans are considered on par with "life form"
differences. There is biologically no room for this basic concern for
cultures. Several problems immediately arise. Should they not be
answered as part of point one? Scarcely if the limitation to 200-250
words is stipulated. The answers would then have to be formulated in the
"comments". (Some may formulate, let us say, 10 points, stipulating 300
words as limit, or 8 points and 500 words,...).

The most important question seems to me to be: what about cultures of a
kind that is a physical threat to others? A trivial, but honest, answer:
they are not meant to be included in point 1. This immediately leads to
the question: one what basis are they left out? The most obvious answer
is that they threaten the richness and diversity of cultures. It is to
be noted, however, that a similar clause is not applicable to the
biological life-forms: some are threats to others, and even when
threatening completely to exterminate some others, we do not
automatically find this to be an acceptable and sufficient reason to
interfere. It must be conceded that point 1 is heterogeneous when
treating richness and diversity of cultures in the same paragraph as
other life forms.

The concern for the extermination of non-industrial cultures was aired
by UNESCO in the late 40s. At that time much could be said which now is
destroyed, but interest among the nations was minimal.

Point 1 does not introduce terms like "race" or make any distinction of
the kind we find in National socialism. It is wise not to explicitly
talk about such things for the obvious reason that the 8 points are
aimed primarily at distinguishing two major trends, the shallow and deep
ecology movement, not to make explicit every opinion which the large
majority of supporters agree upon. It is a matter of the history of
ideas, of opinion research, and of other branches dealing with social
movements to furnish such details.

From the point of one ecosophy, Ecosophy T, the process of
identification is a main driving force of the deep ecology movement.
Identifying with humans supporters find the plight of the destitute and
desperately hungry intolerable - whatever the race or color of the
humans, and whatever the causes of the suffering. It is from this point
of view that supporters are in favor of the social justice movement.

But a strong process of identification leads the supporters to identify
with living beings in general, small or big, "ugnly" or "beautiful", old
and descripant as well as the young and vigorous. There are great
differences in richness, intensity and deepness of identification, but
in common there is a feeling of care and belong to a world of the
living, and a consequent need to protect.

Anybody may use the term "deep ecology" for anything they like or
dislike, but the above traces usages that are explicitly introduced
about 1970 and have notbeen changed since then except in subordinate
matters. ("Worth" is sometimes preferred to "value", "reform" often
preferred to "shallow" etc).

Point 2, applied to cultures, places a greater weight on deep cultural
differences than on shallow. Commercial interests, interests of free
trade and bigness of markets all add to the difficulties of keeping deep
cultural differences alive. The European Market has presumably a long
range of strong influence in the direction of cultural Gleichschaltung.
Local cultural peculiarities are cultivated mainly for the sake of
profitable tourism. From the point of view of cultural anthropology and
the recent world history, mass tourism has not been able to increase the
independence and vigorous growth of cultures.

Richness and diversity of subcultures are specially important both in
the gigantic industrial states and in the mostly artificially created
poor states continuing a rich diversity of tribes and vigorous but
vulnerable, non-industrial cultures. Supporters of the deep ecology
movement naturally identify with life forms in general, which leads to
following the maxim live and let live. Consequently they are led to
support the protectors of the suppressed cultures and subcultures.

The peacefulness of nature is a theme of many supporters of the deep
ecology movement.

It is a common misunderstanding among people at large that if the
species C is a carnivore, and species S₁ and S₂ are the main prey, the
members of these species die a violent death being sooner or later eater
by their "enemies". Careful observation and statistics show this to be
nonsense. It is quite normal for 95% to die for other reasons than being
eaten by enemies. And of those 5% some per cent are significantly
weakened by serious illness or old age. It is important to be aware of
this because many supporters of the deep ecology movement get depressed
from hearing and reading about the continuous fight for life and
survival among non-humans. Few have had the opportunity to observe the
life in coral reef communities which include visiting lazy or hungry
sharks.

"Survival for the fittest"? Yes, but who are most fit? And what means
survival for a mature human being or a culture? The fittedness has only
meaning philosophically when we ask what is best fitted to serve the
ultimate goals and aims of the various life forms, including humans. If
Darwinism, we have to interprete Darwinism not only in historical but in
a philosophical context.

In the English speaking world there is a small number of outstanding
predecessors of the global deep ecology movement precipitated by Rachel
Carson in 1963. In the German speaking world there seems to be more, but
not so pregnant, predecessors. Ernest Haeckel (1834-1919) introduced the
concept of ecology and from the 1880s there is a strong current of
holism, even biocentrism, but unfortunately, also a social Darwinism and
racism. There is a cult of nature, including wild nature going back to
the romantic period of paintig, poetry and other cultural features. It
was almost as strong in Norway as in Germany, but fortunately only a
moderate cult of the Nordic, and almost no perceptible influence of the
doctrine of race.

The national socialist authors and politicians, given the spiritual
crisis of the 30s in Germany and Austria, tried to exploit and redirect
valuable currents which in some ways anticipated the deep ecology
movement. If analogous spiritual crises are going to appear somewhere in
the future the road is open of similar exploitation and redirection.
Those who have suffered from the tragedy of the national-socialism will
perhaps never forget that also within national-socialism there was a
kind of biocentrism and nature conservation and concern for non-urban
local communities. The budjets showed the willingness to pay. There was
a clear conception of how to counteract "the tragedy of the commons".
There was no anthropocentrism, because only the nordic "race" was, at
least according to the extremists, the only one worth keeping alive. The
inferior races were tolerated - at least temporarily - because some kind
of work was not quite worthy of being done by the super-race. People in
ecology and ecophilosophy do not of course feel they in any way have
been positively influenced by the insane racism and social Darwinism of
the Nazi period.

[1] Lecture in Vienna, October 1991, revised in June 1994.
