1992N

Comments: Misanthropic Outbursts and the Deep Ecology Movement

Arne Naess

Richard A. Watson says that “biocentric eco-warriors often see saving
humanity as a an obstacle to saving the environment”. He naturally does
“not support warriors who intimate that the best thing for the
environment would be a final solution for humanity”. (Environmental
Ethics, 14, p.95). It would be of interset to know whether anybody who
intends to be a supporter of the deep ecology movement seriously
entertains the above opinions. I cannot quite see how the movement could
be supported by people of such opinions.

It is common among those who are active the the peace movement and the
social justice movement to experience moments of despair or anger or
both. It seems to help some of them in such situations to denounce the
human race in the strongest words available. One cannot expect that such
outbursts should be completely absent among supporters of the deep
ecology movement. As temporary mental storms they are not incompatible
with honest, firm, acceptance, for instance, of the first points of the
8 points often called “the principles of the deep ecology movement”, or
of similar pro-human announcements. “The well-being and flourishing of
human and non-human life on Earth have value in themselves”. Point 1
does not say “non-human life on Earth has value in itself, not so human
Life”. The points speak about the flourishing of human cultures,
implying the intrinsic value of diversity. If there were supporters of
the deep ecology movement who think less of rich diverse human cultures,
they would say so, but there has been no determined opposition in the
name of the movement to the honorable place reserved for humans. Broad
ecological sustainability is not conceived as a threat but as a
challenge for increase of human life quality.

When a mother brings home a cake to be eaten by her children, there is
less left for the others if one of them eats most of it. If care and
love is thought of as a cake, the people who work for better treatment
of animals are thought to care less for humans. People active in the
work for animals have always been and will presumably always be
confronted with remarks like “How can you work for animals when you know
millions of children are suffering? Why do you care so little for them?”
Any extension of care beyond that of humans are imagined to deprive
humans. The cake brought home by mother cannot be extended, but care can
be extended. There are untapped human sources of care.

Perhaps a supporter of the deep ecology movement suffering from
temporary despair and wild anger could try to prolong this condition
long enough to write a little book, a utopia of the future of life on
Earth without humans, or with only himself and a little band of male and
female deep ecology theorists – an account vibrating with joy: ‘At last
we are alone!’. We could then all laugh together. Feel good about not
being alone.
