1992.8

Deep Ecology for the 22nd Century[1]

Arne Naess

This is not my title! Why did my friends insist on that title? Because
of my many conversations of this kind:

NN: Are you an optimist or a pessimist?

AN: Optimist!

NN: (Astonished) Really?

AN: Yes, convinced optimist - When it comes to the 22nd Century.

NN: You mean of course 21st?

AN: 22nd! The life of the grandchildren of our grandchildren. Are you
not interested in the world of those children!

NN: You mean we can relax because we have a lot of time available to
overcome the ecological crisis?

AN: No, every week counts. How terrible, shamefully bad conditions will
be in the 21st Century, or how far down we have to start on the way up,
DEPENDS ON WHAT YOU, YOU, and others do today and tomorrow. There is not
a single day to be lost. We need activism on high level immediately.

The answer that I am an optimist is a reaction against the so-called
doomsday prophets, people who talk as if they mean nothing can be done
to get things straight. They are very few but they are heavily exploited
by people in power who speak soothingly that the task ahead is not very
great and that government policies can turn the tide towards the better.
A telling example is the cover of the mighty Newsweek magazine which
just before the Rio Conference used the headline 'The End is not Near'.
In the article there was no pep talk, not even an admission that we are
in for a great task that will require new thinking. The very opposite of
a slogan used when a big corporation is 'in the red': New thinking,
greater efforts are called for, new leadership. No slogan like those of
Churchill in 1940: Of course we win, but there will be many tears and
much sweat to be shed.

In short, there is no time for overly pessimistic utterances which can
be exploited by passivists and the dangerous pacifiers.

The realization of what we call broad ecological sustainability of the
human enterprise on this unique planet may take a long time, and longer
the more we increase unsustainability this year and in the years to
come. The mes-sage is of a simple well-known kind: The recovery from our
illness will take time, and the more time for every day we neglect to
try seriously to stop the illness getting worse. The healing policies
today are not serious. The deep ecology movement is for today, but the
definitive victories scarcely before the 22nd Century.

Roughly, I call ecological sustainability broad if and only if the
change ("development") of life conditions on the planet is such that it
ensures full richness ("abundance") and diversity of life forms on Earth
(to the extent humans can en-sure it). Every key word of this criterion
of course needs clarification, but it makes such sustainability
obviously different from what is increasingly accepted politically, the
'narrow' ecological sustainability: An existence of short and long range
policies such that most researchers agree that their continuation makes
ecological catastrophes affecting human narrow interests unlikely. This
is politically accep-table today as a goal for global development. But
broad ecological sustainability centers on ecological conditions, not
only of humanity, and the dangerous concepts of develop-ment is avoided.
By development is still meant something like increase of GNP, rather
than of life quality.

So the big open question is: How far down are we going to sink before we
start heading upwards in the year 2101? How low down are we going to
fall before there is a clear trend of de-creasing regional and global
ecological unsustainability? It may be useful to consider some scenarios
for a moment:

1) No major change of ecological policies and of the extent of poverty.
An ecological catastrophe occurs because of slowly accumulating effects
of a century of ecological folly. The dramatic situation forces new
ecologically strict poli-cies, perhaps through undemocratic, even brutal
dictatorial military means used by the rich countries.

2) The same development except for a major change in the poor countries:
considerable economic growth of the Western kind. Five times as many
people live unsustainably. A break-down follows very soon, and harsh
measures are applied to fight chaos and to start a decrease of
unsustainability.

3) & 4) A couple of similar development ending in catas-trophic and
chaotic conditions and subsequent harsh, brutal policies implemented by
the most powerful states. A turn towards sustainability, but after
enormous devastations.

5) Ecological enlightenment, a realistic appreciation of the drastic
reduction of life quality, an increased influence

of deep ecological attitude, slow decrease of the sum total of
unsustainability. Trend of decreasing unsustainability discer-nable in
the year 2101.

Our hope: the rational scenario, one that guarantees a least strenuous
way towards sustainability by the year 2101.

Now a short note on three great contemporary world-wide movements which
call for grassroot activism.

The three movements are: the peace movement, the oldest and at present
remarkably dormant. But if military expendi-tures are not rapidly
decreasing from about 900 billion dollars a year, I expect it will
revive. Then there are many movements I put together under the name 'the
social justice movement'. It includes the feminist movement and part of
the social ecology movement. As the third movement, one might per-haps
also use the more vague term, radical environmentalism because to use
the specific terminology of deep ecology will sooner or later elicit
boredom and aggression. But the word 'environmentalism' smacks of the
old metaphor suggesting humanity surrounded by something outside, the
so-called environment of humans, it does not start with ecological
con-cepts. And it will take a long time before radicalism loses its
connection with the political red-blue axis:

The Political Triangle

Green

Red Blue

Broad ecological sustainability may be compatible with a variety of
social and political structures, all pointing to-wards the green pole.

Unfortunately, it is now (1993) a strong belief in Eastern Europe that
policies must be blue - participation in the world market etc - before
pointing towards the green pole.

It is not easy to be personally active in more than one of the three
grassroots movements, but a cooperation is essential. The ecological
threat is not only of wars but also of the immense military operations
and connected industrial activity in peace time. Cooperation has for a
long time been excellent. It has taken longer time to establish close
coop-eration with all the social justice movements. But because care and
capacity of identification with all living beings is so prominent in the
deep ecology movement, injustic is taken seriously.

The small minority of supporters of that movement who write in
periodicals, talk in public and organize conferences, meet sometimes
people who are skeptical about their ethical status: are they not much
more fond of animals than of humans? The answer is that whatever the
intensity of their fight for for animals, or wilderness, they recognize
the very special obligations we have for our fellow-humans. What we look
for is not a shift of care from humans towards non-humans, but an
extension and deepening of care. It is unwarranted to assume that the
human potential of care is constant and finite, and that any increase of
care for some creatures necessarily reduces care for others. The next
century will see a general increase of care if the ecofeminists are at
least partially right.

The societies developing in the 22nd Century, at the earlest, I suspect,
will not all look like the green societies envisioned since the 60s.
They will have more traits in common with what we have today.
Conspicuous consumption? Of course! But what is conspicuous, what will
secure prestige and wonder in that century, will have required moderate
physical energy. Several tremendously important things are different:
There will be no political support of greed and unecological production.
The tolerance of grave social injustice based on difference in levels of
consumption will disappear.

To fight the dominance of something should be clearly distinguished from
trying to eliminate something. We shall always need people who insist
that their main goal in life has not been to amass money, but to create
something useful in a world in which money is a measure of success and
creative power.

In sociology we often talk about entrepreneurs in a wide, important
sense of socially highly energetic, creative, in-fluential people. Their
work is often controversial, sometimes clearly destructive, but they are
required in any dynamic society.

I envisage big, but not dominating, centers of commerce, learning and
the arts. Big buildings, vast machinery for continued exploration in
physics and cosmology. But in order to do something analogous to driving
long distances in a conspicuous, luxurious car, a family would have to
work hard through long years and to renounce many goods other people can
afford. Most of the family's 'Gaia-gift' would be spent on travelling in
their prestigeous car.

Rich people who work in the world of business, but are supporters of the
deep ecology movement, ask in all serious-ness whether the green utopian
societies must look so dreary. Why portray a society which seemingly
needs no big entrepre-neurs, only organic farmers, modest artists, and
mild natura-lists. A capitalist society is in a certain sense a rather
wild society. We need some degree of wildness, but not exactly the
capitalist sort. The ususal utopian green societies seem so sober and
tame. We shall need enthusiasts of the extra-vagant, the luxuriant, the
big. But they must not dominate.

In short, I do not envisage the necessity of any drama-tic, sudden
turn-around in social and political variables, when I envisage things
from the limited point of view of overcoming the still increasing
ecological crisis. But as mature human beings, - I imagine that some of
us are mature or on the way to being mature - we are concerned also
about non-violence and about social justice. It is not required of me
today to say anything more definite about these broad social and ethical
issues. But I see the value of expressing vague ideas of how one's own
ideal green societies may look. A green society in my terminology is one
that has to some extent solved not only the problem of reaching
ecological sustain-ability, but also ensured peace and a large measure
of social justice. I don't see why so many people find reasons to
despair. I am confident humans have what is demanded.

Well, this is how I, a supporter of the deep ecology movement, feel
today: Impatient with the doomsday prophets, confident that we have a
mission, however modest, in shaping a better future that is not remote.
Just a couple hundred years.

Postcriptum 1993

The expression 'long range' movement, my insistence that we have time to
carefully choose priorities to make plans that will take a life time to
carry out, left sometimes the impression that what I said was: "lean
back, take it easy. We have plenty of time." In order to counteract this
impression, it is important when we talk in terms of centuries - for
instance when considering human population reduction - that what you,
YOU, do TODAY and TOMORROW is important for HOW BAD conditions will be
in the centuries to come

Immediate action, yes, but the formidable size and vast diversity of
things that must be done, 'the length of the frontier', the very limited
resources of people and funds today available for determined actions -
all this points towards the importance both of a general long range time
perspective and of course a careful consideration of what should be done
more or less immediately.

I still smile when I think about the fate of a certain criminal called
"Yellow Cheese (Gulosten) among his fellow burglars. He was also a great
patriot, and the very day in April 1940 when the Nazis invaded Oslo, the
capital of Norway, he ran around collecting dynamites: his personal plan
was to immediately to bomb the places where they came together in Oslo.
Fortunately for him and for the 5-year long resistance movement, a wiser
fighter stopped him: Direct actions must be carefully planned,
priorities established. Risk your life, yes, but people are needed who
are not sent to German concentration camps within a week of drastic
activity. Think in terms of years! Yellow Cheese understood and survived
5 years of fight. Honored to see the King he developed into a personal
friend of His Majesty.

"The King is thinking BIG, both in space and time", says Michael Soulé
(Wild Earth, Special Issue, 1993, p.7). Properly explained this is not
the same as to be 'moderate'. Yellow Cheese was never moderate, but his
direct actions were planned carefully and rarely dramatic. Tactical and
strategical considerations went hand in hand.

In the ecological movement there is need to think in terms, not only in
terms of days and years, but also in terms of generations.

A response to the article by Soulé says a lot of things compatible with
Soulé's appropriate time scale principle: "any remaining old growth
forest... should be afforded the highest levels of protection", it is
"unconscionable to suggest that it is not important to preserve the
remaining patches on the national forests".

From a point of view of appropriate time scale a slogan like "Stop
logging old growth immediately!" is justifiable, but we know that we
have to select a small number of places, perhaps only one at a time,
where we can try to stop logging or at least convince people that we
seriously mean that no more logging should be undertaken. So we have to
ask: are there spots that have a lower priority than other spots? This
is not compromising in essentials, but admitting that we have neither
the manpower nor the funds available to offer visible resistance
everywhere. Tactical considerations? Sure, but caused by the limitation
of resources. Like in any protracted warlike situation, only that we are
trying to remain strictly nonviolent.

In short, let us be able to join short range and long range
considerations, and remember that the long range considerations in no
way should diminish our concern for the local in time and space.

[1] Talk title chosen by the Institute for Environmental Studies,
University of California, Santa Cruz, 28th April 1992. Published in
Trumpeter, Vol.9, No.2, Spring 1992. Slightly revised in July 1993.
