1992AQ

Deep Ecology[1]

Arne Naess

Deep ecology is a comprehensive worldview of humans in harmony with
nature, an "ecosophy" ("ecowisdom") that responds to the ecological
crisis. It is also a movement to translate the worldview into radical
social reform. Supporters of the deep ecology movement contrast their
position with the "shallow" reform movement, holding that every living
being has intrinsic or inherent value that gives it the right to
flourish, independent of its usefulness for humans. All life is
inter-related, and living things, humans included, depend on the support
of others. For supporters of deep ecology, who tend to oppose the
degradation of nature except to satisfy vital needs, the long-range
integrity and health of the ecosystems of Earth are of fundamental
ethical importance.

The ecological crisis has deep roots in misguided, anthropocentric
attitudes about the domination of humans on Earth. These exploitative,
consumptive attitudes, according to the position of deep ecology, cannot
be overcome without significant social changes, including changes in the
lifestyles of those who live in the rich countries. Such changes can
emerge only from a philosophical or religious basis that nurture a sense
of personal responsibility, not simply to persons living now, but also
to future human generations as well as fauna and flora. The current
human population is already too large in many countries; further human
population increases will lower the quality of life for both humans and
nonhuman forms of life. A smaller human population is desirable and can
be achieved by reduced birthrates over several centuries.

The position of the deep ecology movement can be illuminated by
contrasting it with the position of the so-called shallow ecology. The
shallow position considers it unnecessary or even counterproductive to
take up philosophical or religious questions to solve the ecological
crisis. Its supporters argue that reforms of existing practices are
needed, but reforms of basic principles are unnecessary. Those who
advocate the shallow position do not find intrinsic value in nonhuman
life forms, nor do they find the consumptive economic system
problematic. Humans ought to exploit nature, though prudently. High
standards of living are not objectionable, and can be raised even
further by concentrating on investment in science and technology.
Attempts should be made to bring less-developed nations up to this
standard.

The deep ecology movement’s historic forebears include Henry David
Thoreau and John Muir. Aldo Leopold and Rachel Carson, also of the
United States, are more recent pivotal figures. In 1962 Carson’s book
Silent Spring set off an ecological alarm. Starting with practical
issues related to pesticides, Carson probed the philosophical
assumptions underlying this attack on pests that stood in the way of
human progress. In Europe such ecological concerns joined with the peace
and social justice movement to create the first wave of the "green
movement". Australians also became involved. In eastern Europe,
ecologists were judged hostile to state-sponsored industrial
development, and were banned. In the Third World, long-term ecological
sustainability often had to take second place to short-term economic
survival.

The deep ecology movement argues for ecological sustainability, human
development that conserves the richness and diversity of life forms on
Earth. This position, often said to be biocentric (centered on life)
rather than anthropocentric (centered on human life only), includes what
Leopold called "the land": the whole community of life on the
landscape - rivers, mountains, canyons, forests, grasslands, and
estuaries. Reforestation, for example, does not mean large tree
plantations producing timber and fiber for humans. Such plantations,
which lack the biodiversity, complexity, health, and integrity of
spontaneous natural ecosystems, are not genuine biological communities.

Those who advocate deep ecology and the more shallow reformers must
learn to cooperate. Some strengths of each approach can be combined;
some weakness of each, offset. The former sometimes becomes lost in
utopian visions of a "green world"; the latter may be too absorbed in ad
hoc, short-range solutions. The former press for, and practice, more
modest standards of livng and support higher prices for nonvital
products. Those who are less "deep" can be more pragmatic, willing to
respond to what is currently politically realizable reform. Through such
cooperation the supporters of both movements may help avoid crises
likely to occur if ecologically responsible policies are forced too soon
and too fast on populations that are not prepared for them. The deep
premises of argumentation add to the utilitarian arguments, which are
shallow in relation to philosophical and religious premises, needing
more depth of analysis of the problem.

The discussions surrounding deep ecology have implications for the
medical area of bioethics as well. "Rich life, simple means", an
aphorism of the deep ecology movement, suggests for medical bioethics a
strengthening of preventive medicine and a reduced reliance on
technically advanced treatments, especially if they require large
investments of resources and energy. Medical bioethics can learn from
ecological bioethics the need for a moral vision that can reorder its
priorities.

Bibliography

  Devall, Bill and Sessions, George, 1985. Deep Ecology, Salt Lake City:
  Gibbs M. Smith.

  Fox, Warwich, 1990, Towards a Transpersonal Ecology, Boston:
  Shambhala.

  Leopold, Aldo, 1949. A Sand Country Almanac, New York: Oxford
  University Press.

  Naess, Arne, 1989. Ecology, Community and Lifestyle, Cambridge,
  England: Cambridge University Press.

  Pepper, David, 1984. The Roots of Modern Environmentalism, London:
  Croom Helm.

  Synder, Gary, 1974. Turtle Island, New York: New Directions.

  The Trumpeter: Canadian Journal of Ecosophy, P.O.Box 5853, Station B,
  Victoria, B.C. Canada V8R 6S8.

[1] An article for the Czech Environmental Bureau written in August
1992.
