Published in 11/992

Deep Ecology and the Potters in our Planet

Arne Naess

Yes, I mean “in.” The atmosphere is over us and also part of the Earth.
So we are inside, rather than on, the Earth. We are mobile, too mobile,
fragments and units of life, busy using and misusing whatever we find at
hand for our many, sometimes admittedly queer, purposes.

Potters, as so many others, contribute to the fight against the
resulting degradation of life conditions on Earth. If an example is
needed, you have North River Pottery placed in one of the ecological
deserts (practically no biodiversity) teeming with humans: Brooklyn, New
York. The term “desert” is not quite appropriate, though. It is a center
of human activity which in a not too distant future may be an area with
sustainable rich and diverse life forms. (Let us say, in the
twenty-second century.) In a pottery, in one city, one may now listen to
more sounds and music literally “of the Earth” than ever before.

Asked to tell something about deep ecology for the periodical Studio
Potter I can only say what I would say to a hundred other occupational
groups in our from the point of view of history, of humans
astronomically rich in societies rich in the material and technological
sense. (I am reminded of the saying of Mother Teresa: “We are poor in
Calcutta? No, you are poor!”)

From the 6o’s until today there are, roughly, two main kinds of reaction
to the ecological crisis. First, there are some people who admit that a
new set of global problems are at hand that requires a less polluting
industry, recycling, a less steep population curve, preferably a
stabilization, and more respect for nature. But in the main: business as
usual. This group considers those who ask for deep changes in the rich
countries to be alarmists who underestimate the chances and effects of
technological revolutions if the crisis turns out to be more severe
than scientific research today estimates it to be. They regard those who
introduce a philosophical or religious issues as soft-headed, and
“ecosabotage” a form of terrorism with no good effects in democracy.

A minority reacts very differently. The way of life in the rich
countries is devastating the conditions of life on Earth if it continues
in the present direction, they say. And that way of life is not
conductive to the fulfillment of the basic goals and ideals of a good
human life. So nothing essential is lost if societies change their main
aspect; not only economically and technologically but also the social
texture; nothing less is required in order to significantly change
ecologically relevant policies and general political priorities.

In the long run life quality will not decrease, but rather increase.
Humans will use a little more wisdom and will be able to realize a rich
life with simple means. The point of view of this minority is based on
philosophical or religious premises, even if these are not articulated
except rather fragmentarily or not at all. They may be said to have or
manifest, however vaguely, a philosophy of life or even a view of the
whole, a total view.

Within both groups there are many who use some of their energy to
overcome the crisis, even if they clearly see that their personal
contribution has to be small. The former I call supporters of the
“shallow” or the “reform” ecology movement; the latter, the supporters
of the “deep” ecology movement.

I italicize the two words because they are often neglected where they
are important. Thus, there is a widely used term “deep ecologist,” in my
view an unfortunate designation. It makes it natural to add a somewhat
ridiculous term “shallow ecologist”. Most supporters of the shallow
movement do necessary and excellent jobs. It is only a waste of time
when they oppose the deep movement in general. Instead of the term “deep
ecologist,” one may use “deep ecology theorists”. There are hundreds of
articles and books by authors, philosophers and others, who discuss
important questions of principles, and who sometimes add complicated,
sometimes unclear discussions. The rank and file supporters, the
backbone, need not bother to read the theorists. They need not know the
terminology.

It is of importance that groups who otherwise have different opinions
and belong to different cultures find each other and encourage each
other. To help, however modestly, to reach this situation is the main
function of the common terminology. It is important to feel that
thousands and thousands are working for the same goals. It is also good
to feel that it is not only people from the rich countries, but also
people in materially poor areas who eagerly and under adverse
circumstances work along the lines of the deep ecology movement. My
presentation here is one adapted to people in the rich countries with
high formal education relative to the global average.

One general way of explaining how deep ecology movement has come to
being is to note the expansion of care. More than ever it is seen that
non-human living beings also need care, whether they are considered
useful or not from a narrow human point of view. People who always have
found it meaningful to do things for their own sake, whatever the beauty
or ugliness of these beings, find that there is a frightful lack of
care, locally, regionally and globally. Therefore most supporters tend
to agree that every living being has intrinsic or inherent value or
worth. And that there is a right, if rights exist at all, that belongs
to every living being.

Considering the consequences of the population explosion in the last
centuries, the opinion exists that it would be good for the fulfilment
of human basic goals in life to be fewer, and very good for other living
beings if there were fewer humans. The fulfilment is more likely if
there are significantly different human cultures, but that requires
space. Perhaps in the twenty-second century a slow decrease of the
population will take place. But ethical consideration suggests that this
is a process that requires many centuries of wise policy.

It is plain that respect for non-industrial cultures must prevail among
the supporters as part of their concern for future richness and
diversity of life forms on Earth. What is called ecological
sustainability requires sustainability of human life forms, but the
importance of the peace movement derives largely from the tendency
within some cultures to coerce or even destroy others. A good sign of
increasing awareness of past destruction is furnished by the mixed
feelings about the “discovery” of America in 1492. The resulting
destruction both of human cultures and life conditions in general have
been of gigantic proportions. But we can only smile at the idea that it
might have been postponed until the appearance of greater human maturity
(say, in the twenty-second century?).

How would future societies look? How would the requirement of not
violating deep ecology principles affect the structure of human
societies? Interestingly enough, it seems that a wide variety of
cultures, including their social aspects, may fully take care of those
principles. But some should be disregarded because of inadequate
satisfaction of two additional sets of requirements, those laid down by
two mighty old movements: the peace movement and the social justice
movement. The basic emphasis on increasing care within the deep ecology
movement largely insures a broad cooperation within the two others. The
unecological aspects of armaments and wars are too obvious to dwell on.
But clearly some long range ecological goals must be ignored today in
order to be of material help to very poor countries starting development
toward economic progress but this, of course, does not imply support of
a development in the direction of the so-called developed countries.
That must be avoided at all costs, even if it will elicit serious
hostility on the part of the power elites in so many poor countries.

My vision: a manifold of green, or better, colourful, societies, few or
no power pyramids like USA or EEC. It cannot, of course, be part of the
function of deep ecology theorists to work out blueprints of
ecologically fully responsible societies, but to use both their creative
imagination and full power in criticism. The green movement at its best
learns from all the three movements requiring grassroots and activism.

Ecological sustainability requires full richness and diversity of life
forms on Earth. The term “richness” is meant to convey the idea of
local, regional and global abundance, not only absence of extinctions.
The scary diminishing of biodiversity practically everywhere in the
suburbs has only recently been investigated thoroughly. A change towards
richness and diversity requires profound change of city and regional
planning. It is difficult to see how this will happen if the “business
as usual” attitude prevails. The supporters of the deep ecology movement
have a formidable task to accomplish, and the frontier is long. Don’t
press people active in one sector to move to a different one. Victory
means an immense contribution to life quality of humans, and relief to
countless other beings.

Bibliography

Devall, Bill and sessions, George. Deep Ecology. Salt Lake City: Gibbs
Smith, 1985.

Naess, Arne. Ecology, Community and Lifestyle. Translated by David
Rothenberg: Cambridge University Press, 1989.

Pearce, D.; Markandya, A.; Barbier, E. Blueprint for a Green Economy.
London: Earthscan, 1989.

Published in Studio Potter June 1992 Vol. 20 No. 2
