1992AK

Relation of ecofeminism and social ecology

to the deep ecology movement

Arne Naess

A. Ecofeminism

(1) 'Male dominance has caused most of the ecological unsustainability.'
This and many related views we find among ecofeminists are important and
accommodable on the third level of the apron diagram of the deep ecology
movement. - Personally I find it a very important tenable view, but in a
mild and tentative formulation.

(2) 'Women have and are still exploited, denied equality,..., in many
relations.' The negative effect is clear from (1) and (3). Consequently
it may, I think should, belong to level 3.

(4) 'Increased power of women relative to that of men would facilitate
the adoption of ecologically responsible policies'. Agreed - on the long
run. Not much effect on the short run. (Example: a majority of women in
the Norwegian government has not clear effects so far.)

The above views may be derived from deeper views (along
pr./concl.-chain), perhaps from level 2 or 1, but I do not see how, or
the importance of it. Level does not suggest importance. Praxis is
perhaps most important, so level 4 is more important than 1, 2, 3?
(Ambiguous).

Deepness along pcc does not indicate fundamentality, priority,
decisiveness. A premise A is deeper than a premise B if B can be derived
from A, but not A from B. From the mortality of the dog named Arne, as a
premise one cannot derive fairly logically, the mortality of all dogs,
but...

B. Social Ecology

(1) 'The ecological problems of today are not ecological, but social and
political in a wide sense.' This I can subscribe to, but not in the most
absolutist versions. I would say the problems of today concerning
ecological sustainability are ecosophical. We need no more certainty
about ozone layer, or climatic influence of pollution, as rational basis
of change of every every social aspect of hman life, especially those of
the rich nations.

(2) 'Deep ecologists tend to underrate the importance of deep political
change as a source of overcoming the ecological crisis. The crisis is
political.' There ared no deep or

shallow ecologists in T-terminology. the articles and lectures by
theorists of the deep ecology movement tend towards the nature-nature
pole:

nature! theorist-talk

social-social!

Spirit-spirit!

But most of them are politically active. NB! A tiny minority of
supporters of the deep ecology movement are theorists, less than 1% of
1%.

(3) 'Deep ecologists do not accept that without eliminating poverty,
there will be no elimination of the ecological crisis.' Accepted, but we
cannot wait for the elimination of poverty (the victory of the social
justice movements in general) in our fight for ecological
sustainability.

(4) The attempt to dominate nature is a side effect of the actual
domination of humans by humans. This is an interesting historical
hypothesis belonging to level 3 in the apron diagram. Most supporters of
the deep ecology movement do not agree 100%, some disagree.

Using the highly instruction pseudoequation

U = (P_(u) + C_(u)) N

Two open questions are:

1) How far are the miseries in poor countries going to proceed before
there is substantial economic progress?

2) When will a proper concept of economic progress be dominant,
discarding the economic growth paradigm?

Why is U = (P_(u) + C_(u)) highly instructive? But both the enlightening
features and the realization of the unenlightened features are
enlightening!

Deep ecology movement relation to feminism

Self-realization! Theorists may be said to derive certain important

view from ultimate

premises. Here is an example.

No to reduction

of Self-realization potentials!

Society reduces Self-reali-

zation potentials of women

Society favoring full Self- Society favoring

realization potentials for acceptance & sat-

women! isfaction of the

8 points

Both ecofeminism and social ecology contribute to important views and
practices. In the apron-diagram I place the views on level 3. They
concern the causes of the ecological crisis, and consequences on level 4
outlining action in part derived from the views about the causes.

Moralism and gender

My limited life experience supports the following hypothesis: girls and
women in the cultures I have lived in, act beautifully to a higher
degree and in more types of situations than boys and men. To get this
properly understood and to maintain this superiority is a worthy social
goal.

(In a country where the majority in government are women, it does not
show very clearly, but it is difficult to know how it could show up very
clearly.)

Criminal acts may be divided into those which break moral injunctions
(according to a certain standard) and those which do not.

Main point

The present wave of support of environmental ethics may easily support a
wave of neglect: neglect of support of conditions for beautiful acts.

The wave may foster a feeling of self-satisfaction: there is much going
on to change acts, personal, corporate, groups and government, in the
direction of support of decreasing ecological unsustainability.

But people are not easily moved by moral injunctions, and the less there
is absence of a long, strong tradition in the field of application of
injuction. (Family moral, preparation and practice of war).

One reason why the moral approach is supported more than the inclination
approach: it costs much less to moralize and to show the way and change
social conditions.
