1993AT

The Norwegian Roots of Deep Ecology

Arne Naess

Has Norway anything to tell the world? Something that is more or less
specific for Norway and which should be appreciated by the world before
our little nation disappears as just a tiny province in societies in the
future superclass? I don't know anything else other than the classical
Norwegian friluftsliv, free-air-life. Norwegians walk, run, creep into
nature to get rid of whatever represses them and contaminates the air,
not ony the atmosphere. They don't talk about going out, but in and into
nature. There they find themselves, who they are, what they stand for.
And then come back wholer, surer of themselves, readier to face the
problems inevitably confronting them in cities, towns, even in their old
local communities.

A sort of escapism? No. A sort of finding oneself, stand up, not like
Peer Gynt 'going round' and 'avoiding'. And, of course drink of the
beauty, and majesty and generosity of nature.

The above is an idealization, but judging from what people from other
countries say, it is still a living tradition. People seeking a
companions through small personal advertisements in newspapers write
remarkably often something like this: "I love to walk in the woods and
among the mountains." This ensures that very, very many readers think
"Well, at least one good character trait."

I do not at all maintain that we have been wise in our environmental
policy. We have been thoughtless and greedy for money, and have
destroyed a lot. But we have our contradictory traits like most others,
I assume.

I cannot resist the temptation to mention one very special friluftsmann,
free-air-person.

In 1991 King Olav the Fifth of Norway died. His popularity was
overwhelming. But here I shall only dwell on a subject I haven't seen
others focus on, the pictures accompanying his New Year television
speeches to the people of Norway. During the speech we see one mountain
landscape after the other, some with mountain flowers, others with
nothing but snow, ice and rock. Rarely we see any people, there are no
cities, and the houses, or better, homes of humans, are inconspicous.
King Olav showed something that at his time was called an underdeveloped
country. Now the term "developed country" has been discredited because
it always refers to the rich industrial countries. Their obvious and
increasing policies should not be characterized by a plus-word like
'development', and the worst then can happen if the so-called developing
countries have the consumerism of the rich.

A remarkable king who in a unique way illustrated the first words of our
national anthem: "Yes, we do love this country,...". It is not conceived
as our country, in the sense of a country belonging to humans, it
belongs to itself. About 50% of its area is along, about or above the
timberline. But from the pictures shown during the New Year speech, one
might think that practically all of it consists of mountains and only at
rare places is the modest home of humans.

What to me is most remarkable is the absence of comments about the
pictures. I have never heard anybody utter any comment. It is as if
everybody thinks "Of course, the King shows the land as it is in its
grand beauty, the King expresses the population's love of the majestic
land in his humility and love. No talk about 'its' constitution, 'its'
democracy, 'its' - the country's - material progress."

Sometimes we are reminded of a streak of antidevelopment visions. Ibsen
contrasts love and development. In the tragic figure John Gabriel
Borkman, the central figure of the play with his name as the title, he
illustrates the self-destructive, self-centered illusion of a grandiose
exploitation of nature, making nature into merely a resource. He says he
hears music in the mines. It is heard when the miners work to get at the
mineral wealth. "... the metal sings, in its own way, out of joy",
anticipating to "serve mankind"! And to serve him in his way to "power
and glory". He loves the metal. "I love you, I love you...!".
Nevertheless, a "metal hand" grasps him and he dies. After five years in
prison for malpractice, his dream of being a great developer kills him -
and his relation to his nearest.

There is another play of Ibsen, the only classical play focusing on
toxic pollution and how vested interests may obstruct the efforts to
warn the population about threats to their health. It is titled The
Enemy of the People. "The whole of our flourishing municipal life
derives its sustenance from a lie!" (That there is not threat from
heavily polluted water.) The representative of "the people": "The man
who can throw out such offensive insinuations about his nature town must
be an enemy of our community." Ibsen warns that if there is a conflict
between economic interests and health, people will generally support
what give them employment and income.

I have been asked to speak about the Norwegian roots of deep ecology.
What I have so far said refers to separate points of interest, but I
must now try to outline what is called the deep ecology movement as a
movement with environmentalism in a broad sense. The supporters of the
deep ecology movement try to contribute to the protection of the
abundance and diversity of life on Earth. This they have in common with
all active environmentalists. What is special for them may be said this
way: Their efforts are supported by their life philosophy or religious
views. They tend to explain their eagerness to protect referring to
their most basic views and attitudes, their value priorities, their
understanding of what makes life meaningful.

Seen from a fairly narrow logical point of view which I like, the
supporters of the deep ecology movement may be said to try to derive
their relevant practical decisions in concrete situations from their
ultimate premises in life. This gives them a particular strength, but
may also result in undue reliance of particular philosophical or
religious doctrines. But combined with a non-violent ethics of love and
respect, as part of their fundamental views, they are inoculated against
fanaticism. What they have in common is difficult to formulate in a few
sentences. My own proposal is as follows:

1.The well-being and flourishing of human and nonhuman Life on Earth
have value in themselves (synonyms: intrinsic value, inherent value).
These values are independent of the usefulness of the nonhuman world for
human purposes.

2.Richness and diversity of life forms contribute to the realization of
these values and are also values in themselves.

3.Humans have no right to reduce this richness and diversity except to
satisfy vital needs.

4.The flourishing of human life and cultures is compatible with a
substantial decrease of the human population. The flourishing of
nonhuman life requires such a decrease.

5.Present human interference with the nonhuman world is excessive, and
the situation is rapidly worsening.

6.Policies must therefore be changed. These policies affect basic
economic, technological, and ideological structures. The resulting state
of affairs will be deeply different from the present.

7.The ideological change is mainly that of appreciating life quality
(dwelling in situations of inherent value) rather than adhering to an
increasingly high standard of living. There will be a profound awareness
of the difference between big and great.

8.Those who subscribe to the foregoing points have an obligation
directly or indirectly to try to implement necessary changes.

It is not difficult for people who have the responsibility for Norwegian
environmental policy to subscribe to these principles. Actually
practically all those whom I have asked in a long letter, subscribe
without any substantial reservations. So they talk about priorities, the
question of producing 'clean' hydroelectric power, the need for roads to
reach every beautiful spot, and so on. But the basic attitude is there,
and it is the Norwegian root of deep ecology.
