1993F

The Deep Ecology '8 points' Revisited

Arne Naess

Ten years ago it was fairly common to express astonishment that people
with very different philosophical and religious backgrounds appeared as
supporters of the deep ecology movement. What did they have in common?
Or, how could they have anything in common? How would they define what
deep ecology really is? The first question seemed to me most important.
It was important to emphasize that supporters of the deep ecology
movement need not have basic premises of a philosophical or religious
kind in common. On the contrary, the deeper the differences the better,
because of the value of deep differences in cultural background. It was
at that time - in the early 80s - important to point to views held in
common. In two ways there were clearly things in common: personal sorrow
or despair when environmental battles ended with defeat, and
corresponding joy when there was at least partial victory. But also a
high degree of agreement about the need for, and acceptance of, 'direct
actions' of some sort, and what was to me a great thing, clear
consciousness about the limitations of means to be used: nonviolence. It
was typical that many supporters had been active in the peace movement
before becoming environmental activists.

Less clearly, the supporters had fairly general and abstract views in
common, or almost in common. What the critics and doubters needed was a
not too complex and detailed survey of such views, put forth
tentatively. The formulation of the '8 points' was the result of
cooperation between George Sessions and myself. That the short points
were called 'principles' or expressions of a 'platform' was perhaps
unfortunate. A longer name is indispensible, for instance, 'A set of
fairly general and abstract statements that seem to be accepted by
nearly all supporters of the deep ecology movement'.

The term 'seem' is included because what is meant is not only acceptance
as an articulate answer to the question, but acceptance in a wider,
somewhat vague sense, as in sentences like "Mr A accepted Mr B's
leadership", "In the Ashram they accepted that snakes and scorpions were
permitted to stay in their sleeping quarters during the nights." The
chance might be that an inmate, if asked, would object to letting
certain snakes in the room, but so far no such snakes had appeared. It
has been encouraging how people say, "Yes, of course I accept those 8
points, but so far I have not had words to express my attitude." What
the points have offered is mainly to put words to views people have
'always' had, but not expressed, at least not in public.

The reception by supporters of the set of 8 formulations has been
satisfactory. But perhaps some readers have forgotten that it does not
cover the philosophical or religious views of the supporters. Or that
the points are not intended to function as a definition of the movement:
not as a rule-given definition of the term, nor as a plain description
of how the expression "the deep ecology movement" is actually used, nor
as an expression of the essence of the deep ecology movement. I do not
know of any satisfactory definitions at the dictionary level. I do not
think a dictionary entrance like this is very helpful:

  "Deep ecology movement. A movement within environmentalism which is
  activist, ecocentric rather than anthropocentric, and based on
  nonviolently philosophical or religious views."

Looking back, I am glad to get the opportunity to make some notes about
the 8-point list, not all of them critical:

1. It has been suggested that the 8 points should comprise a point the
'all things hang together'-theme. The best way of including seems to me
to be that of Fritjof Capra. He suggests the following alternative
formulation of point 2: "The fundamental interdependence, richness and
diversity contribute to the flourishing of human and non-human life on
Earth."

The alternative is important to me mainly because the three factors
mentioned are presented as instrumental, not as values in themselves.
Such a presentation does not, of course, rule out the inherence of value
of the richness and diversity, but I have thought that inherence must be
declared explicitly in the formulation of the point. But why 'must'?
Conclusion: the suggestion adds to the set of alternative formulations
of the 8 points. (I have myself not found it possible to stick to one
single way of formulating the points.)

To hang together as a kind of interdependence may be a threat. One hears
of warnings: remember humans are unfortunately dependent upon the health
of ecosystems. Therefore respect nature or you invite disaster.

In short, I have so far not found sufficient reason to include in the 8
points a reference to the 'all things hang together'-theme. It should be
unnecessary to add that anything like nature mysticism - ultimate unity
of all living beings and similar 'level 1' views - have no place among
views which supporters may have in common. The views about, and feelings
of, the intimacy and kind of 'hanging together' may differ. The
interdependence referred to in the alternative formulation is of the
kind that supporters talk about, not any kind of

parasitism.[1] I find it regrettable that J.Baird Callicott, a

supporter of the deep ecology movement as far as I can understand,
believes that some kind of nature mysticism is implied by being a
supporter. "Indeed they argue that ecology teaches us that the whole of
nature is the true Self." ("The Search for an Environmental Ethic", Tom
Regan, (ed.), Matters of Life and Death, 3rd edition, N.Y.: McGraw Hill,
1993, p.330). This is a queer formulation. Supporters of the movement
may have total views inspired in part by reactions to the ecological
crisis, such total views I have called ecosophies. I call my own
Ecosophy T. Fortunately others have different ecosophies. (One thing we
have in common is that the articulation of our views is (and must be)
fragmentary.) In a premise/conclusion systematization I use,
'Selfrealization!' as designation of one ultimate premise. Some feel at
home with this, others not. The 8 points could not possibly contain that
norm.

I do not feel bad when Professor Callicott mistakenly seems to more or
less identify my opinions with those of Mahatma Gandhi. He quotes from a
section of my "Self-realization..." which I introduced by writing "I do
not defend all the views presented here: rather I primarily wish to
inform you about them." Later in the section I write: "Gandhi says: "I
believe in advaita (non-duality). I believe in the essential unity of
man and, for that matter, all that lives. Therefore I believe that if
one man gains spirituality, the whole world gains with him and, if one
man fails, the whole world fails to that extent." The quotation from
Gandhi reminds me of his belief in the individual. It shook the world
when, as the accused before the judge, Gandhi uttered, "The individual
is the supreme concern". He does not belong to the great mystics,
neither do I belong to the small ones.

"Scientific ecology will not support the claim that the self is in
reality the Self, that the individual is identical with the world" -
writes Professor Callicott. I might join him in saying that support of
the claim would mean the end of scientific ecology. Anyhow, nobody has,
as far as I know, found that the 8 points imply a kind of nature
mysticism.

2. In recent years considerable efforts have been made to distinguish
two concepts and express the one by 'intrinsic value' and the other by
'inherent value'. What I intend to express by 'intrinsic value' in the 8
points is now better conveyed by the term 'inherent value'.

Some critics tell me that I must enter the professional philosophical
debate about what exactly might be meant by terms like 'intrinsic
value', 'inherent value', 'value in itself' (used in Ecology, Community
and Lifestyle). But even in the comments (about 400 words) this is
misplaced, and only special groups of people would need to transcend the
everyday level of depth of intention (discrimination), and then at

level 1 of the Apron Diagram.[2] The main thing is that the point
formulations admit various interpretations, but interpretations with
reasonably small differences. The level of vagueness and ambiguity must
be within tolerable limits.

3. I try in my philosophy (or rather, 'ecosophy') to be consistent in my
view that singular beings and only singular beings can have inherent
value, not classes as such. (The term intellectualis amor in Spinoza's
Ethics I likewise take to be loving-understanding (as one phenomenon) of
singulars). Point 2 makes this difficult if not landscapes or the whold
Earth is taken to be singular beings. If otherwise, I would attribute
value to some kind of multiplicity. Certainly I do not attach inherent
value to species of families as classes or sets of beings with more than
one specimen or element.

In the brief comments to this point (ECL, p.30), it is not made
sufficiently clear that the use of the expression 'no right to' is like
that of the everyday use: "You have no right to eat the food of your
little sister!". It is mostly not felt as identical in meaning with "You
ought not to eat...". It does not imply an affirmative answer to the
existence of 'rights of man' or 'rights of animals'. Because of the vast
controversies in professional philosophy about 'rights', it may be
unwise to use the expression 'no right to' in point 3. I am not
convinced, and the use of it opens the good question, "Why can't animals
have rights?" If the answer is "Because they have no obligations", the
next question is "What about babies? The mentally ill?" Such discussions
tend to lead people in the direction of softening the hard views about
'man apart'.

As to the term 'vital needs', several comments are ready at hand. (ECL,
p.30) What you need in your life is a small fraction of what you are led
to desire in the rich countries, but in regions of desperate poverty,
the majority do not get their vital needs satisfied whether they reduce
or don't

reduce the richness and diversity of life forms.[3]

4. The population point was in 1984 point 5, but the content of points 4
and 5 suggests that the population point should be no.4 rather than
no.5.

5. Many supporters of the deep ecology movement believe that a reduction
of the human population would of course be a great gain for humanity and
for non-human life, but they don't see how it could happen within the
scope of decent ethics. Sometimes they refer to changes within a couple
of centuries. What seems a little odd to me is that they at the same
time think that stabilization (zero growth) could occur (without "nature
taking over" in the sense of catastrophic wars or hunger, or both). If
transition to zero growth is practicable, why should it not be a
reduction of say, 1/4 percent per year? Within a couple of centuries
that would make a lot of difference from a state of zero growth. The
firm acceptance of the population reduction point does not oblige one to
speculate about how great a reduction one has in mind. That is a
different question.

It is my serious thought that the 8 points, or corresponding sets of
points provided by other supporters, should be acceptable without
hesitation by nearly all supporters of the deep ecology movement. I have
therefore found that point 4 might be 'softened', perhaps in the
direction of formulations like the following: "It would be better for
humans to be fewer, and much better for non-humans."

If the 'decrease' or 'reduction' terminology is retained, comments
should include these two points. The process of a slow but adequate
reduction naturally will take more than a couple of centuries. The
situation in some rich countries where zero growth is reached or nearly
reached, makes it important for governments to declare that nothing will
be done to counteract a process of reduction in the next century, but
that those economists (and others) who show how a satisfactory economic
situation can be maintained during the difficult transition period, will
be consulted.

In a process of slow decrease, there is a slight increase in the
percentage of people above the age of pension. Perhaps

it will motivate a slight increase in the pension age. Capital per
person will be slightly increased, and also the availability of
resources in general. Chances of significant unemployment will be
slightly reduced, and so on. But adequate discussion of the economies of
population reduction cannot be the aim of these remarks. Both
strategically and tactically, it is, in my view, of central importance
that more people than in the economically richest countries realize that
population reduction is compatible with maintaining or increasing life
quality. Point 7 is here meant to be relevant. One cannot expect people
in less rich countries to believe in this if very few in the richest
countries do.

Clearly many people do not consider it possible that adults can have a
near, warm relation to small children whom they have not produced
themselves. But in many cultures, architecture and the use of space make
it possible for small children to walk around without danger and to be
taken care of by neighbors and friends. Young parents do not worry when
they go to work and the kids might stay overnight and have close
relations with 'uncles' and 'aunts'. Adults who all their lives wish to
have small children around them and like to spend time with them are
highly esteemed, an indispensible part of the community. Under such
conditions, one may have closer and more durable relations to small
children than those in our rich countries who have produced 4 or 5.

I have spent many words on the population issue because I think now is
the time in some countries to reconsider city and spacing policies
anticipating a slow decrease of population that may start in the near
future in some countries, say within a couple of generations, or even
sooner.

6. The deep ecology terminology was introduced in a highly politicized
environment. "Every question is a political question" was a slogan you
might hear repeated every other day. The very able neo-Marxist and
Frankfurter School student knew very well that slogans and repetitions
are indispensible in a social movement. When the green movement suddenly
surfaced in European cities, in Norway with the basic slogan

"Green Grass!", it was laudable in my view, that activism and the
necessity of social and political change was made a central point.
Economy, technology and politics must be subject of teaching and
discussion in any 'environmental' movement. The combination of point 6
and point 8 is supposed to express the seriousness of this insight. But
it does not of course mean that all supporters must specialize in party
politics or related activities.

Supporters of the deep ecology movement naturally work within the
horizon of the 'alternative future' movements. More specifically they
work with the supporters of the green movement which may roughly be said
to require of a society that it has largely solved the peace, social
justice and ecological sustainability problems. The intimate cooperation
and mutual respect among people whose activism in a natural way is
focused on one, not all, of the three areas of problems is excellent,
but does not exclude strong utterances in favor of their own special
kind of work.

Because the main work of the supporters of the deep ecology movement
concerns only a part of what is required of a green society, there can
be no such thing as a 'deep ecology society'. The requirement of full
ecological sustainability limits the kinds of societies available.
Because intrinsic value, respect and support of deep cultural
differences are viewed (in accordance with points 1 and 2) on par with
the attitudes towards richness and diversity of non-human life forms,
any social or political trend of the fascist or Nazist kind runs
contrary to the requirement of full ecological sustainability.

Critics have deplored the lack of an authoritative deep ecology
blueprint of a society satisfying the requirement of the 8 points, texts
like Goldsmith's Blueprint for Survival, but updated. More or less broad
visions of future green societies are expressed within the green
movement of which the deep ecology movement is only a part.

Personally I imagine deep cultural differences among green societies in
different parts of the world. Valuable suggestions have been made since
the 60s, but they do not so far show, in my opinion, how diversity of
thinking, acting, of cultural priorities, may be normal among future
societies, all of them satisfying the three requirements.

In any case, point 6 is not the place to go into specific requirements
of change. A vague, general suggestion is made into a separate point 7.
I am not sure that it is a good idea to have a point like that,
suggesting something about the general direction of the change of
politics.

Anyhow, it has been a great satisfaction for me to note that no
supporters have indicated that I overrate the importance of overcoming
the political change as a necessary condition of surmounting the
ecological crisis.

There are supporters who think that the 8 points have been overrated,
that they do not deserve the position they sometimes are accorded. And
obviously, if the points are taken to express the philosophy
characteristic of the deep ecology movement, or even the principles of
deep ecology, it is in a

sense a grave misinterpretation of the purpose of the ca.200 words used
to express the points. Maybe it should be repeated more often that they
only present an attempt to formulate what might be accepted by the great
majority of the supporters of the movement at a fairly general and
abstract level. Different sets of formulations are needed to express
something very similar, but in the language of supporters in the
non-industrialized parts of the Globe. As formulated, the 8 points are
in a sense provincial - adapted primarily to discussions among formally
well-eduated people in rich countries. Introducing the 8 points in
non-industrialized societies, I have of course used very different
formulations, sometimes for instance, not speaking about the Earth at
all, and limiting the intended validity of point 7 to rich countries. It
is a curious phenomenon that some people in the West think that poor
people don't fight for preservation of non-human beings for their own
sake. In 1973, the families of a poor

village in Nepal voted 46 against 0 to send their headman with a
petition to protect their high mountain against tourism - foregoing the
income they might gain. Without having seen such phenomena, I would not
talk about the international movement of deep ecology.

Concluding, I would like to ask for forebearance that I have talked so
much about a small set of formulations. But they have so far been
helpful in fostering a feeling of being closely together in a task of
supreme value.

[1] The 18 points of my "The Shallow and the Deep Ecology Movement", I
soon found out, smelt too much of the special metaphysics of a younger
Naess. They were discarded in favor of the 8 points - to the regret of
some readers. The 1973 article declared the ego to be like "knots in the
biospherical net or field of intrinsic relations." Still I may use the
sentence "all living beings are ultimately one" which embarrassed Sir
Alfred Ayer in our one-hour debate. (Reflexive Water, Fons Elders,
Souvenir Books, 1974, p.31).

[2] The Apron Diagram

level 1

level 2

level 3

level 4

[3] Points 3 and 8 are the points that mostly clearly belong to a
(normative) ethic covering actions related to the ecological crisis. An
announcement of an obligation is made in point 8 and of an ethical
prohibition in point 3. Both belong in an ethic of vast scope covering
our relations to the non-human beings. The search for an environmental
ethic is, as I see it, a laudable undertaking from the point of view of
the deep ecology movement. Some supporters disagree, I suppose, but I am
not sure I know of any. Professor Calllicott writes: "Deep ecology...
rejects ethics outright...". (p.325), but the four quotations, three
from texts by Warwick Fox and one from me, don't justify what Callicott
writes. Like many others, I distinguish between an ethic as a normative
system or, in Professor Callicott's terminology, "a conceptual system"
(p.338), and acts of moralizing: one individual or group admonishes
another individual or group to follow certain moral precepts. "We
certainly need to hear about our ethical shortcomings", I write in the
article quoted by Callicott, but I have emphasized, and continue to
emphasize, the rather limited motivational force of moralizing. The
Kantian distinction between beautiful acts and moral acts is ehre
convenient. ("Beautiful Act. Its Function in the Ecological Crisis" in
Environmental Values, Vol.2, No.1, Spring 1993) compared to policies
facilitating attitude change in the direction of ecologically
responsible behavior. Three of the four quotations are from texts of
Fox. He certainly holds that norms of ethics with the structure of
points 3 and 8 do not involve "narrow, atomistic, or particle-like
conceptions of self."
