1993R

How should supporters of the deep ecology movement behave

in order to affect society and culture?

Arne Naess

C.A.Bowers has written a helpful and provocative unpublished article
which touches upon this question. Summing uo, he states that an
"awareness of culture in terms of a semiotic perspective may help us
affect changes at a prereflective level of awareness and meaning that is
beyond the reach of the printed word. Thus, the real challenge is to
broaden the approach to ecosophy in a way that takes into account the
primacy of culture - in all its dimensions." (P.19). What some of us
write who are not only supporters, but also theorists of the movement,
seem to rely abnormally on "the reach of the printed word". One
legitimately asks whether we do anything else than writing and giving
speeches. And we do other things, why don't we say so?

Gandhi was both supporters and theorists of a gigantic movement. It is
always instructive to see what kind of practice he was engaged in.
Always a campaign included a constructive program. The supporters
declared themselves eager to help and cooperate in the daily work of
opponents as well as supporters. "Trust begotten in the pursuit of
continuous constructive work becomes a tremendous asset at the critical
moment." (Young India, 9.1.1930). It is decisive that the opponents
understand and trust you. Talk is of course not enough, and who reads
what you write?

In a modest way, a constructive program was carried out in a conflict in
Arctic Norway. We obstructed the preliminary work for building a dam.
The local people in favor of the dam were furious. When they approached
our camp, the rule was to invite them to coffee. That is a culturally
based sign of peace and goodwill and it is difficult to reject an
obviously seriously meant invitation. The people were given plenty of
time to vent their anger. Before leaving supporters of the direction
action asked sincerely whether they could be of any help. Many of the
angry people wer family farmers and the supporteers asked whether there
were fences to be repaired etc. Through the constructive program it was
easy to make people listen to our views how they could get a necessary
amount of electricity without the dam.

In short: the supporters tried to understand adequately the general
cultural determinants of the opponents and act in a decent way as judged
from their cultural point of view. Unfortunately there was a relatively
clear line of division: the angry locals had in general less formal
education than the locals who were against the dam. In such a case it is
of course a plus to mobilize supporters who talk and act in a way that
is completely familiar to the formally less educated, the family farmer
and labor people. Talking in local schools it was difficult to make the
people in favor of the dam speak up. What always helps is to do
something together, practical and constructive.

Theorists are often badly equipped to do constructive work, but
fortunately that constitutes only a very tiny minority of the supporters
of the deep ecology movement.

Supporters in industrial countries who focus on the population problems
have naturally more than enough to do in their own countries, but if
they venture to accomplish something (locally), say, in Kenya, the
acculturation process is formidable. Women who try to increase female
influence in matters of procreation, must live in the village as much as
practically possible in harmony with its cultural traditions. They must
serve the community in a convincing way and get trusted. It is a form of
constructive program in the sense of Gandhi. Obviously people from the
West cannot, and should not, have any decisive influence in the
population conflicts. And if the culture is a so-called traditional one,
the way to proceed demands considerable work before anything can be done
directly in the area of populatin policies.

In Uruquay, social ecologists who also are supporters of the deep
ecology movement, work among the 'poor' whose old traditions contain
many ecologically sound ways of production and consumption trying to
revive and strengthen them and warding off the unecological ways
introduced by Westerners and the power elite of their own country. Here
also the cultural aspect is of paramount importance. Supporters from the
West are nevertheless capable of cooperation with a minority in the
traditional society and widen that minority. Not much of the supporters'
time is spent on writing and theorizing.

Supporters work on personal, social and political levels. On the
personal level they assume that people have a significant range of
freedom of decision, a considerable range of choices. They may have
within a certain framework the opportunity to work out their own
guidelines of conduct in life. The way I talk about ecosophies
justifiably evokes concern that I overestimate the freedom to choose
basic guidelines in life, and also overestimate the importance of
personal ("individual") choices in a society where a large degree of
conformity and consensus reduces or seems to reduce devastating
conflicts.

The technique of working out premise/conclusion surveys of (parts of)
ecosophies is a very special and "western" technique. For people with
certain kinds of background, it is not only a convenient but potentially
wholesome activity when trying 'to live according to one's teaching'. It
helps development in the direction of 'living according to reason' as
viewed by philosophers and others who have a Spinozist bent. That is
judging decisions to be irrational or a-rational, which are not
consistent with one's ultimate premises - one's basic beliefs and
attitudes. It is a common feature in life that changes of basic beliefs
and attitudes occur with difficulty and the efforts to articulate
verbally what happens are important for some person. But for most
supporters of the deep ecology movement, it would presumably not be
helpful at all to work in the way I do with myself. Working in community
and society my terminology and my diagrams may rarely be useful.

Tools used when thinking and arguing for and against a decision in
particular situation may seem rational, intuitive, individualistic or
collectivistic. It depends on one's 'meta-thinking', thinking about
thinking and arguing. With my background, the use of premise/conclusion
models does not preclude high estimation of ways of life and of deciding
matters in traditional societies. Nor does it preclude trying to find
out what can be learned from such societies.

Cultural traditions are not monolithic or like crystals, either
continuing or essentially unchanged or destroyed, crushed. "The are two
points that must be balanced", says Hilary Putnam, "both points that
have been made by philosohers of many different kinds: (1) talk of what
is "right" and "wrong" in any area only makes sense against the
background of an inherited tradition; but (2) traditions themselves can
be criticized."[1]

The criticism does not need to be determined by influence from a
different tradition. That is, a member of a definite tradition may
experience things which the member critical with in that case being
influenced by a 'foreign' tradition or culture. According to at least
one tradition, extraordinary fatness is taken to be proof of
extraordinary health and an adequate defence against illnesses which
kill others. From this it seems to have been infered that such people
are immune to AIDS. A member of of the tradition may find it difficult
to understand the death of a very fat person reported to have died of
AIDS: perhaps the doctor is wrong or the traditional belief is wrong.

Even if somebody is a full member of the tradition, the second option is
realistic.

There is an open question: how should we interpret "sense" in the above
quotation from Putnam? If a member of tradition A says to member of a
tradition B that something the B-member does is "wrong", B may not
understand the word "wrong". When we talk, what we say is only
"understandable against the background of an "inherited" linguistic
"background". But i may say to a member of a very different tradition
from mine that what tht member does is wrong. Perhaps I may be
criticized for this by some cultural anthropologists, but the member may
perfectly well understand what I mean, and answer that perhaps I am
right, perhaps Not. Two requirements for this to happen are (1) that I
have learned the verbal language or body language, of the other
tradition, and that there is a distinction right/wrong in their
tradition which roughly corresponds to that of mine. As far as I can
judge from my own experience, there exist such correspondences across
many cultures. For instance it is understood when we criticize a certain
kind of cruelty (according to our own tradition) the members of another
tradition condone because it is part of an old ritual.

From the above I conclude that there may be senses of "sense" which
makes what Putnam says under (1) adequate, but there is at least a sense
of "sense" in which talk about what is right and wrong (but not
necessarily about "right" and "wrong", using those terms) make sense -
across deep cultural differences. We are not imprisoned in traditions!
Under-estimation of cultural traditions as a determining factor of a
person's thinking and acting should be fought, but this fight is itself
based on an assumption that of complete cultural determinism: the veiw
that what we think and do is entirely determined by traditions.

According to Putnam what he calls a "cultural relativist" can say "Well
then, truth - the only notion of truth I understand- is defined by the
norms of my culture".[2] Such a point of view leads to inconsistency or
worse. Two main points discussing the concept of different ecosophies is
(1) the vast importance of cultural determinants of the thinking and
acting of an ecosopher, and (2) the importance of the wide range of
potential personal creativity. The creativity may have had bad
conditions in the formative years of a person, but the rule is that even
in such a case the person in a sense recreats a cultural tradition when
'internalizing' most of its norms. Anyhow, serious research with the
goal to describe a culture as a whole will end with descriptions which
depend on a more or less arbitrary framework, and mostly end with a
acknowledgement of vast simplication. This may give the reader the false
impression that a culture 'has' a strict coherence of definite sets of
norms. It is understandable that the people doing research within what
is often called cultural anthropology don't like to use the term
"culture".

What is above said regarding theories about traditions and cultures
applies to theories about interpretation (in a wide sense) within the
hermenuetic trend in philosophy. An expression like 'the social
construction of reality' "The statement that "you are not expected to
agree... but to learn the means for developing your own systems or
guides, say, Ecosphies X,Y, or Z" (italics added) reflects the liberal
assumption that decisions should be based on the free choice and
rational judgment of the individua. Locating the ultimate authority for
this decision within the individual would be totally inconceivable in
cultures based on pre-modern cosmologies." (P.13). This is a statement
about my statement which I find interesting, but somewhat misleading. My
experience in traditional societies has led me to believe that the range
of personalities and range of choices of lifestyles may be quite
considerable there. Some of the differences seem small for us, but they
are considerable within their culture and consequences are as drastic as
joining a 'far out subculture' in a rich industrial society. It is not
my experience that, for instance, 'poor', illiterate, family farmers in
the mountains of Hindukush (Pakistan) make less "decisions... based on
the free choice and rational judgment of the individual". As Muslims of
sorts they may be said to locate "the ultimate authority for "a
decision, not within their own person. They would refer to their own
community and to Allah. I am speaking about the 70 porters we hired to
help our expedition to carry provisions etc in very rugged mountainous
terrain, including glaciers. Our interaction with our porters was
intimate, dramatic, and offered excellent opportunity to study
differences of personal character. The differences were deep! One of
them was a thief, let me here cal him Abdul. Sometimes when we could not
find something, for instance a tool, one of our porters would say,
"Abdul may have stolen it." Usually it was found. I liked Abdul and he
probably understood that, and when we were crossing a valley he stole
some apples for me. The glimt in his eyes seemed to be saying, "Of
course I am going to steal as much as I can from you, but I like you." I
do not pretend to know much about his total view, but I do think that
he, in his way, was able to articulate some of it. As a 'deviant', as a
person refusing to follow a lot of the norms - and hypotheses - of his
community, he probably engaged in some verbal articulation having to do
with general guidelines in life.

In short, I do think that my talk about total views is roughly appicable
to persons in traditional societies. They have, in part, 'their own way'
of life. And the expression 'their own' does not imply opposition to any
main tradition in their community. "Saying 'your own' does not imply
that the ecosophy is in any way an original creation by yourself. It is
enough that it is a kind of total view which you feel at home with,
'where you philosophically belong'. Along with one's own life, it is
always changing." (P.13). If you feel very much at home with the
traditions of your community, your way may be completely within the
limits of the traditionally tolerated range of differences. Because a
traditional society is always changing. There is intense discussions
centering on particular traditions. The range changes, gets wider and
narrower.

I am not sure I know what Bowers mean by "liberal assumption", and
"continuing commitment to the basic tenets of liberalism" (P.13). It is
difficult for meto think within the terminology of "ideological
liberalism" and "ideological conservationism". But when I read that Gary
Snyder's bioregionalism appears "to be based on essential values and
assumptions that can only be described as ideologically conservative"
(P.13), I tend to like to be classed that way myself. It is, on the
other hand, inevitable to be classed as "individualistic", the way I
often focus on personal choice. It is a focus that is very different
from that of colleagues in sociology and political science. "You
overrate the capacity and opportunity of people to choose!" This may be
the case, but I believe sincerely in the vast strength and importance of
historical, social and political determinants of personal decisions.
Point 6 of the 8 points is thought to express what most supporters of
the deep ecology movement agree about on a fairly abstract level,
suggesting that the work to be done is largely social and political.
There is little basis for an assumption that supporters of the deep
ecology movement are politically passive, or that supporters in
industrial societies do not look for things we may learn from
non-industrial societies.

Bowers points to important sources of contemporary insight - sociology
of knowledge, cultural anthropology and a certain trend in semiotics. He
summarizes the key assertions of a part of sociology of knowledge in a
way that makes them roughly acceptable if I am permitted to insert some
words of caution:

"(1) the person's taken for granted sense of "reality" is socially
constituted; (2) what is /conceived as/ "real" is /largely/ dependent
upon multiple pathways and patterns of communication; (3) the cognitive
schemas acquired through communication with significant others become
internalized as the individual's /early/ intersubjective self; and (4)
the socially shared typications, assumptions, and categories that
provide the schemas necessary for thought and communication are also
part of the self-identity process." (P.17).

The insertion "early" is meant to emphasize the mature person's own
crreative thinking and feeling participate in the formation of his
social and ecological self. The insertion "conceived as" is important,
because certain philosophers, especially within the hermeneutic
movement, write and talk as if they meant that what is real is
determined by humans. The various formulations of laws of gravity are
all humans creations, but not what they are intended to refer to,
however inadequately.

Bowers mentions "the rational articulation of how to understand the
identify (I would say 'development') of self as part of a larger process
of "Self-realization". The quotation is part of a longer sentence that
starts as follows: "When culture is understood in terms of the multiple
processes of semiosis that help to constitute what the person
experiences as real both (both in terms of the meaning of the context
and self in relation to context) it becomes quite evident ...". I would
maintain that the theoretical articulations about self and Self is seen
to have a rather limited function in whatever terms culture is
understood (in contemporary cultural anthropology). It may be held that
Warwick Fox and I do too little addressing the cultural aspects of the
ecological crisis, but we are very clear about the many-sided efforts
needed.

With this admittance of fallilibility, I shall end my notes on the
article by Bowers. Ecological awareness and cultural awareness should
develop together, and also articulated together.

[1]     ^(?)See Hilary Putnam's article in After Philosophy

[2]     ^(?)Idem, p.232
