1994.V

Climbing and the Deep Ecology Movement

Arne Naess

/Here introducing DEM, 2 pages max./

Reality as we know it has an abstract structure and an unsurveyable
richness of content. Modern physics and cosmology study its abstract
structure with extreme success. The 'soft' sciences, poetry, literature
and the arts reveal concrete contents.

A mountain may be defined in terms of structures such as geographical
coordinates and physical properties. As contents we may acquaint
ourselves, with its beauty or ugliness, its threats or its support, its
mysteriousness or clarity, its hugeness or its insignificance, its
fecundity or barrenness. So far as I can judge all these properties
belong to reality as far as known to mankind. It is a blind alley to say
that it really is a swarm of atoms, or simply a void. This way of
thinking confuses abstract structure with concrete content.

As supporters of the deep ecology movement, we try to emphasize the
positive contents as part of the general fight for preserving what is
left of the planet Earth in its unsurpassable splendour.

Let us mention avalanche. They are more often conceived as threats than
as splendid, awe-inspiring natural phenomena. In part it is due to
population pressure, pressing people too high up the valleys against
their own common sense, in part it is due to overestimation of our own
strength and insights, as when peasants with great elan have pushed far
up the valley, and have brought their wives and children to a tragic
death. Our sympathy is with these people and we are apt to think of
avalanches with horror and even with anger and moral censure. But for a
mountaineer, not overpowered by competitive urges, but in love with all
the life processes of the mountain, the observation and meditation of
avalanches are positive acquaintances, every time different and never
adequately describable for outsiders. Consequently, if the avalanche
does not hit somebody, or at least nearly hit somebody, it is of slight
interest for the media.

The avalanches are only one kind of mountain phenomena, and of course a
very special kind. We have narratives and works of art, some going back
at least 3000 years, and testimonies from the most diverse cultures,
Chinese, Japanese, Astec, Indian, Greek, showing positive acquaintance
with mountains. There is a far-reaching similarity of descriptions,
testimonies of the majestic, awe-inspiring, unreachableness, serenity,
purity, of their protective function, their job to make us see far, to
let us survey, to make us free, strong in a good sense, concentrated on
the essentials in life.

Using the somewhat misleading term 'symbols', the mountain has
symbolized the upward, the lofty and the high in a positive sense, and
therefore of course what is nearest heaven.

On the other hand, the symbol of what goes downwards is associated with
what is low, flat, hollow, and evil. The devil never has been located
very high, the evil spirits in nature are mostly in caves, hollows, or,
if in rocky landscapes, not in the really great mountains.

Perhaps the surge upwards rather than downwards is millions of years
old. Anyhow, from early infancy climbing up is a positive experience -
up stairs, up on chairs and tables, and with age, up on windows, roofs,
trees, rocks. It is difficult to explain why some children dislike these
activities except through certain bad happenings or depressive moods.
For me it is difficult to understand why grown ups let go such
experiences, and thus, with increasing routine, go on from trees to
mountains. The question "why do you still climb?" should be countered by
the question "Why did you stop?".

But in cultures like ours where people do not like certain tribes live
in caves on vertical cliffs, the climbing of mountains by grown ups is
taken to be something extraordinary, hard to explain. Sometime ago in
Norway, as something foolhardy on the verge of insanity, or also
something admirable as expressions of great courage, toughness,
masculinity etc. As if climbing were more dangerous than skiing!

Consider the following happening. A little girl, perhaps 10 years old,
rows out in the Arctic Ocean in big waves to meet the local steamer and
gets a big, heavy sack of potatoes of something that is lowered down
from the ship. The little boat moves up and down and so does the sack
above the head of the girl. I am amazed. Not so the other people lazily
looking at what is happening. Why? Because it is part of a culture, a
tradition, and it is more or less trivial. But a lot of training, years
of training, and some unruffledness (uforferdethet) is required. Later
some of the bystanders discover our climbing outfit, ropes etc.
Amazement. What folly! Dare-devils! Admiration mixed with outrage. What
we do is part of the Arctic Norwegian culture. A mountain with some
70-80 degrees precipices looks vertical. No place to put hands and feet
are seen at a distance. We may explain that some training and much
experience on steep surfaces make climbing mountains a safe thing, as
safe as skiing and other outdoor activities. But they are not convinced.

Climbing is not more 'dangerous' than skiing. But unlike easy skiing in
moderate surroundings, easy climbing on moderate precipices requires
attention, like driving a car. Yu cannot turn around looking for a piece
of chocolate on the back sheet. You must turn the wheel at the proper
moment and non confuse the brake with the gas pedal.

But what about the challenge, excitement, technical virtuosity of
climbing? The all round mountaineer is perhaps a serious person,
engulfed in meditation and deep experiences of mountains as they have
developed in famous cultures? This is a misconception. There is no
contradition between the all-sided mountaineering and virtuosity in
climbing techniques.

The excitement is there. And the risks except risk of life and limbs.
Think of a crack that seems to lead to a beautiful littel ledge near the
summit. It seems that the crack stops just a couple of yards below the
ledge. It takes hours and hours to enter the crack, and time is short.
We risk a very unpleasant biouvac if we do not reach the ledge.
Excitement, challenge, fear of not reaching the ledge, but a moderate
fear, a fear that elicits smiles.

To risk life or limbs is just stupid, and often irresponsible
considering the consequences for one's nearest. so, it is felt as a
great shame when a mountaineer falls, or obviously does things
recklessly. It is practically like cheating in sport. Somebody
"succeeds" in reaching a summit, but as a climb it is unsuccessful
because rules of safety are ignored. The party had not strong enough
members to carry 30 pounds each - the minimum on that climb in order to
survive safely a week in a snowcave in case of increased change of
avalanche at a certain spot.

Many young climbers stop climbing when being married or through mild
pressure from their nearest who suffer every time a climb is planned.
They do not give up skiing or fast driving! Implicitly a form of
climbing is taken for granted which reflects the image not created, but
gladly maintained and nourished by the media.
