1994.O

History, postmodernism and deep ecology

Arne Naess

1. The original title of this course included only the last two terms.
But recently the story has emerged about how homo sapiens after the last
ice age mananged to ignore seemingly obvious ecological truths and with
catastrophic consequences for major civilizations. It is a very big
story, not "a small narrative" - a cherished term in postmodernist
literature. In the 1970s important historical studies were made and in
1991 a very readable survey was published. It is of interest that some
of the participants in the course take a look at the book: Clive
Ponting: A Green History of the World. The Environment and the Collapse
of Great Civilizations, N.Y.: St.Martin's Press. As long as history
textbooks ignore this apsect of our commom history on our planet, the
outlook is dim for energetic changes of policies today: Policies persist
which in the long run ensure collapse for the same reasons previous
small and great civilizations either have collapsed or where the great
majority of people have lived a short life on the verge of starvation.

2. After a discussion of past miseries, the course continues with a
critical survey of a recent trend which thousands of youths in many
countries find belongs to their own generation and deserves serious
consideration: so-called "postmodernism". There is postmodern art which
are are not going to study, but also postmodernism as a trend in
philosophy. It questions search for truth and other great human
undertakings, it questions any authority (except in mathematics etc.).
We all have our "small narratives" to tell, and we are all competent to
partake in "cultural conversation". (The trend has some interesting
similarities with dadaism after the First World War.)

The importance of postmodernism derives from the need to express our
loathing and frustrations from having again and again to search anew,
working hard to find what we truly are, what life is all about, and how
we can find trustworthy guides in the efforts to overcome wars, cruel
dictatorships and desperate need - and how to save the planet, including
us.

The hypothesis put forth in the course is that there is no way we today
can or should give up our search, however laborious. And being active in
our search we experience joy, especially when realizing that we all are
important in what we do.

3. One immense story is human efforts to avoid further "collapse" of
civilizations through environmental thoughtlessness. The deep ecology
movement contributes because it brings together all those who
