1994G

Intramural Note. February 1994

What do we as supporters of the deep ecology movement stand for and
believe in?

Arne Naess

The following was written just after some talks on policies on the way
to the creation of green societies and on policies in green societies.
We needed a kind of unpretensious, tentative survey of options.

A

Full long range regional and global ecological sustainability! This
implies biodiversity and abundance of life forms. The present
concentration on avoiding threats of extinction is not enough:
populations should reach high levels and interference only for
ecological reasons or strong reasons of health of humans.

(Restoration biology: where practically possible, degraded ecosystems
should be restored. A plan formulated for Sweden in Sweden: about 20
billion dollars yearly for restoration purposes. Politically
impossible!)

B

It is generally agreed today that present industrial societies are
ecologically unsustainable. Any future industrial society would be
unsustainable. To try to "repair" present industrial societies would
only make them live a little longer. Sets of technologies, if any, which
presuppose that the society as a whole is industrial, are therefore to
be avoided.

An example: Suppose a million people within a future green society are
strongly interested in certain questions in astronomy and propose that
an "advanced" and powerful telescope be produced. The following are some
of the reactions to this proposal among supporters of the deep ecology
move-ment:

Reaction (1): "In a green society of the sort I envisage, people are not
interested in astronomy of the kind that require "advanced", powerful
telescopes. There would be nobody or too few, deeply interested in
that."

Reaction (2): "To ask for that kind of a telescope implies asking for a
considerable fraction of contemporary "advanced" technology. Heavy
metals, energy-costly machinery of a great variety of kinds. It requires
big organizations and institutes characterizing contemporary industrial
societies. In short, to get such a telescope implies a society too much
like the present unsustainable industrial societies."

Reaction (3): "Hopefully, the future planet will support deeply
different green societies. Perhaps 20 deeply different ones. At least
one may have a great number of members interested in parts of astronomy,
cosmology, or other fields of research demanding the energy-intensive
technology. Perhaps the creation of a powerful telescope can be produced
without making the society as a whole ecologically unsustainable. It
might require, say, a million people who are very eager to have the
telescope, and who are willing to live in a more austere way than the
rest. This way the influence on the ecosystems by that million will not
be greater than what each of the other millions are responsible for, and
which we suppose satisfy requirements of sustainabilitiy. Ideologically,
the urge to continue parts of the present astronomy may or may not be
dangerous for the greenness of the societies. That depends upon how
present astronomical data are interpreted, whether there is still a
belief in "reductive" philosophies of science."

It is today difficult to answer the questions posed and is of course not
of primary importance to answer today.

Conclusion: the three different reactions are today compatible with
support of the deep ecology movement.

The example suggests that some present energy expensive tools used in
the exact sciences are in many ways incompatible with the kinds of
technologies envisaged in green societies. They are not incompatible
viewed isolated from the general substructure they require. But to
neglect to consider the substructure is to avoid the question posed.

C

Which are the kinds of technologies adapted to the basic premises of a
green society? Well, how many words are the answer supposed to contain?
If less than 100 the answer is either very superficial or, in a sense
avoiding the question, must contain references to texts, answers already
existing and perhaps containing thousands of words.

It should be noted that the question is a much wider one than the
foregoing. A green society presumes far-reaching solution of the peace
problems and social justice problems. Some technologies which are
unobjectionable from the point of ecology may be objectionable from the
other two points of view.

A two-word answer adapted to the sustainability question: soft
technologies. There are texts defining concepts of softness. One may
have different opinions which concept is such that it suits the two-word
answer. The bigger the population, the softer the technologies required.

An answer requiring more words: soft technologies, technologies of such
a kind that the products, produced in adequate quantities, require very
little energy, use very little or no unrenewable resources, and leave
very little garbage or, more generally, cause very little pollution or
have no long range objectionable effects. - This answer contains less
than 50 words but does it help us much? One peculiar thing is the
repetition of the expression "very little". Obviously it reminds us of
the importance of the sheer volume of production.

Example: a supporter of the deep ecology movement is in favor of
continuing putting fluor in the drinking water (as done in some
countries to avoid bad teeth.) A contra argument against this is that
fluor is an extremely strong poison. But a contra-contra argument says
that practically everything or very many things we use, are poisonous in
big quantities, and here we have to do with extremely small quantities.
A second counterargument will remind us that to produce pure fluor
chemicals requires much industrial substructure. A third counterargument
says that in a green society the food is such that bad teeth are
avoided. A small minority may not pay attention to the health of
customers, but it makes no sense to introduce fluor for their sake.

Contributions to the technology discussion which does not seem to
require that technology fostered by the present rich industrial
countries be severely problematized, are incomplete. What we as
supporters of the deep ecology movement need are contributions which
clearly have as a premise exactly that problematization. Not discussions
as how to 'repair' industrial societies, keeping them industrial.

D

Introductory talk about technology serves its mission when it clearly
shows the infinite ramification that is unavoidable if you ask for
practical advice. Only guidelines can be suggested. It is too early -
with unsustainability still increasing - to do more than discuss
different 'scenarios'. - We shall now introduce a completely different
theme.

Introductions to deep ecology, whether in separate lectures or in
courses should take care not to be one-sided. There are three forms of
one-sidedness which deserve to be mentioned. Some supporters exalt the
beauty and other positive features of nature and what they call natural.
What is needed is said to be more love of nature. Others express with
ardour the spiritual side of nature; spiritual ways of cultivating
nature, and the importance of individual and collective spiritual
process of awe awakening and maturing. One of the often used terms is
that of "ecological consciousness", the inner ecological awareness. The
literature sometimes resembles that of "new age". What is bascially
needed is more spirituality, a new religion, perhaps. Others again
center their talk or writing on the social and political aspects of the
ecological crisis, seemingly being of the opinion that the overcoming of
the crisis is entirely a question of changing present social and
political relations, being caused by social and political anomalies such
as suppression and domination.

Discussion in depth with members of the two latter groups tend to make
it fairly clear that they recognize a great variety of causes of the
ecological crisis and a variety of approaches to overcome it. But they
concentrate on one kind of cause and one kind of approach. They are
without adequate basis, thought to ignore or reject other approaches.

No need to use time in polemics! There are many ways of talking and the
front is long: people are needed along a vast front. Let people conceive
their particular work as crucial! Those who have to do with distribution
of public funds and facilities should express a broad view, but they
cannot avoid setting up lists of priorities. The same holds true of
editors of periodicals and organizers of courses.

E

An essential aspect of the deep ecology movement is activism: from
theory to practice, and from practice to theory. One may express it like
this: the full meaning of a theory can only reveal itself in practice,
and practice is blind without theory.

The term "activism" in environmental matters is not a narrow term for
direct actions, sometimes violating laws, courting prison etc., but for
a continuous, insistent, persistent work with people and campaigns. A
specialist in the theory of social movements, especially the deep
ecology movement, may sit in libraries all year round, and he may tell
us important things. But I don't think it is natural to call him an
activist in the deep ecology movement. These are supposed to be led by a
world view to act in practical, particular situations in favor of the
goals of the deep ecology movement. Most participants in the deep
ecology movement don't like to be "labelled", to be classed as parts of
a movement. Therefore I have introduced the term "supporters" instead of
"members" or "participants". A supporter may, for instance, avoid the
typical terminology of the deep ecology movement. Warwick Fox and others
tend to think that "deep ecology" has been made into a slogan, covering
much that has little to do with the basic tenets of the movement.
Personally I think that such misuse is unavoidable, but it does not
weaken its serious impact.

F

Deep ecology: optimistic or pessimistic? - One essential point
supporters have in common is the view that present global trends
increase ecological unsustainability. We have not reached the turning
point, and the outlook for the next 20-30 yers is somber.

When will the turning point be reached (if at all)? Opinions vary. I
guess that the beginning of the 22nd century is a realistic possibility.
The socalled "greening of production", "development of new
technologies", said to go on now and the many contemporary "green
inventions", do not assure that we ever reach the turning point.
Analogy: the leaders of an expedition to reach a mountain in a little
explored area agree that they have to change direction from going north
to going south, but such news will upset the members too much. They
decide to go north-east and slow down the tempo somewhat. The supporters
of the deep ecology movement do not fear the misgivings but repeat and
repeat that we have to change radically the direction of the major
trends of development; and the dominant concept of "development" itself.
The decisive change of direction must be expressed in acceptance of
significantly new policies and of ways of life in harmony with those
policies.

G

Under the title "alternative movements" many movements in many
countries, some supported financially by governments (e.g. in Norway),
try to produce blueprints of post-industrial, post-modern societies.
They include ecological sustainability, but mostly not full
sustainability, just avoiding major calamities.

Supporters of the social, including the antihierarchy movement, cannot
alone offer a blueprint for a gree society.

Nor can supporters of the deep ecology movement do so without close
cooperation with two other great movements requiring grassroot activism:
the peace movement and the social justice movement against extreme
poverty, social discrimination and hierarchical oppression.

The conception of a green society include a far-reaching elimination of
the evils fought against by the two other grassroot movements.
Limitation of time and energy available makes it difficult, if not
impossible, to be an activist in all three movements, but efforts are
made to share information and to join forces when necessary.

It is theoretically possible that ecologically high level societies have
deep "blue" scars, are authoritarian, even dictatorial, or that most
people there are poor. In short, the requirements of fulfilling
ecological sustainability do not determine every essential
characteristic of a green society.

These are mere reflections. They are based on a conviction that
articulation of the deep ecology attitudes will significantly hasten a
turn towards more responsible policies.
