1995Z

The antifascist character of Deep Ecology

Arne Naess

The difference between the deep ecology movement and an ecosophy is
often overlooked. The characterizations of the deep ecology movement
such as the 8 points have essentially the limited function to clarify an
important differnce of emphasis within the general ecological movement.
The ecological movement has as supreme goal to assist the overcoming of
the ecological crisis. An ecosophy is a total view in part stimulated or
inspired by that crisis. As a total view its concern is in principle,
with every question a human being is more or less pressed to take up in
full sincerity - meaningful human life, the relation to nature and to
the cosmos, the basic priorities of values, social and political
philosophy. Very little of a total view can be articulated in words -
except by philosophers and prophets who devote their lives to it.

The limited character of the deep ecology movement obviously makes it
absurd to derive any definite governmental and general political theory
(or philosophy) from a set of adequate characterizations of it. The
conceptions of Green societies should be elaborated with care, leaving
space for cultural differences. Deep ecology must never degenerate into
a sect.

Taking into account the above remarks one should not feel it as an
affront, a hostile manoeuver, when some critics look for a possibility
that fascism, or some policies resembling fascist policies, could be
found to be compatible, for instance, with the 8 points. If one thinks
it is important to cut off any interpretation that might suggest such a
possibility, some of the 8 points may be formulated slightly
differently, or the 400 words 'first order' comments can eliminate the
matter.

The word "fascism" is used in various ways, all of which makes it into a
'dyslogism' - a negatively loaded word.

Speaking on the level of dictionaries, "fascism" is used in a narrow
sense centering on the kind of governing by Mussolini, and a wider
sense, including national socialism of Hitler. As a curse one speaks of
fascist behavior - extreme rudeness or brutality. As a form of
government fascism (in the wide sense) is characterized by dictatorship,
aggressive nationalism, militarism and racism.

So much about the dictionary level. In countries where older people have
vivid memories of the atrocities of fascist governments, it is usually
considered indecent to play with the word when one criticizes political
opponents. The younger generation or people unaffected by such
government don't have strong feelings about it and may sometimes use it
freely in polemics.

Fascism implies a marked higher valuation of a nation as a whole, and
the race as a whole, compared with the individual human being. Also the
ideology of the fascist state is protected as a whole. Any deviation in
opinions may be punished harshly.

It is sometimes suggested that some statements made by theoreticians of
the deep ecology movement leave the door open for the possibility of
interpretation which in their extreme form are compatible with fascism,
or at least with a low estimation of the individual human being compared
with a whole of the nation. That is, open the door for the realization
of at least one of the main characterizations of fascism.

Point 1 of the 8 points in Devall and Sessions' Deep Ecology (p.70) and
in my Ecology, Community and Lifestyle (p.29) does not mention
individuals. The term "life forms" perhaps suggests species etc more
strongly than individual specimens (like individual humans). The
possibility is open that for the benefit of the "flourishing of human
life", the rights of the individuals may not be taken seriously or
seriously enough according to the opinions of the supporters of the deep
ecology movement (including myself). In the commentary to point 1 in the
book by Devall and Sessions, the point is said to refer to "individuals,
species, populations, ..." and "implies a fundamental deep concern and
respect". But according to my own total view these formulations do not
offer the individual being the central place it deserves according to my
intuition and my political philosophy. My standard examples always
concern individuals, for instance individual mosquitoes, never species.
I may in irritation kill a mosquito mercilessly, but with no arrogance
as to its "less" intrinsic value than that of myself. But we are no talk
about theoretical statements, not examples.

Before 1985 and after 1990 I have often used the following formulation
"Every living being has intrinsic value independent of its usefulness
for human purposes". (Or: "All living beings...) This expresses my
intuition better, but it elicited criticism from a prominent ecologist ,
who supported the deep ecology movement, but went against my (and
others!) tendency to underrate species and ecosystems. From a (purely)
ecological point of view the individual specimens have mostly no
importance. (Consistency would require this announcement of "importance"
to include humans). The critique, of course, does not apply to the
ethical (as part of the ecosophical) points of view which must be
separated from the ecological - when referring to the description of
ecosystems.

Many supporters of the deep ecology movement express a high degree of
'wholism', using phrases such as being "like a leave on the tree of
life". It borders on certain forms (philosophical) mysticism -
expressions of a mystical union with Life (with a capital L). It would
limit the conception of 'supporter of the deep ecology movement' if the
high degrees of wholism were to be incorporated in the characterization
of deep ecology movement, for instance if it were to be strongly
suggested by the 8 points.

There is a need for different sets of formulations with the functions of
the 8 points. Considering how I personally conceive the intrinsic value
of life, I consider the following type of formulation of point 1 better
than those of the two texts mentioned:

  "Every living being has intrinsic value. The intrinsic value of
  non-human living beings is independent of the usefulness they may have
  for narrow human purposes."

In point 2 there is also talk about life forms. Better leave out the
term "form".

The supporters of the strong verions of wholism may retain the
formulations of the two texts. They are not incompatible with the new.
The old does not say that it is not so that individual living beings
lack intrinic value. This holds even when "life forms" is interpreted
not to include individuals. The old version does not say that nothing
else than life forms have intrinsic value. Point 1 should not delimit
the class of everything that may have intrinsic value. Point 2 announces
the intrinsic value of richness and diversity of life forms. But even
that point does not exclude the possibility that there are other items
that have intrinsic value.

It is not uncommon to think that deep ecology supporters look down upon
the mere reformers, or the "shallow ones", and the strange idea may
occur that in a crisis the "deep" people grab the power, introduce a
dictatorship and proceed to persecute the "shallow", violating the
rights of man the way we know this happens in many countries. But today,
and in the foreseeable future, supporters of the deep ecology movement
are totally dependent on the great work done by people who are not
motivated by ultimate premises More than a hundred people are directly
or indirectly active in Norway investigating climate changes that may be
due to human impact. "Pollution disregards borders!" and other slogans
are used to promote activity in favor over overcoming the global
ecological crisis. The prospect of changing the policies of government
are in part dependent upon the work of these and thousands of other
activists who are uninterested in ultimate premises. We are dependent
upon the increase of work done by activists who are unaffected by the
deep ecology supporters.

It is not irrelevant what the deep ecology theorists announce in books
and articles, and also what 'Green' political theorists announce. The
distinction between 'Green' and 'green' goes parallell to the
distinction 'deep'/'reform'. Not a single of these authors plays for a
movement with any idea even faintly reminding one of fascist or even
mildly authoritarian regimes, nor of any possibility that the Greens
should attack the greens if the former get to be powerful. The adoption
of responsible ecological policies - policies significantly different in
strength that the contemporary - is supposed to be possible within a
democratic governmental framework. But not only 'doomsday prophets'
engage in speculation about what may happen if the present passivity
continues, one scenario envisages the breakdown of democratic regimes,
and the reign of terror and dictatorship.

That there is a value which every living being has in common, the
intrinsic value of the living, does not rule out tremendous difference
in obligations and duties: the deep ecology movement search for widening
and deepening care, and this naturally comprises humans. The present
state of affairs with millions of fellow-humans starving is unacceptable
and reguires immense effort from the side of the rich countries to do
what can be done to contribute to the necessary changes. One should
never forget that the three peace movement, the social justice movement
and the ecological movement. They are intricately related, and decisive
progress in one area requires progress in the others. It is an
unfortunate misunderstanding that activists in one area tend to be
callous in their relates to the others. But clearly it is tough enough
to keep on year after year with the active work within one of the areas.

Perhaps we must (reluctantly?) acknowledge that gain for one of the main
movements may sometimes result in loss in one of the others.
Pacification may be gained through deplorable structural violence - a
loss in social justice. In South Asia millions have been liftet out of
their poverty, but without the rich living less wastefully. Result: gain
socially (more equal level of consumption), defeat ecologically.
