1995WX

The Anti-fascist Character of Deep Ecology

Arne Naess

The word "fascist" is sometimes used today in a rather loose way
suggesting cruel behavior of a power elite, or a group seemingly
intending to work for establishing such an elite. In what follows I use
the word more in contact with fascism as a historical phenomenon. Benito
Mussolini was the first to use the term, and his regime was the first
fascist regime. But the national socialism of Adolf Hitler is the best
known fascist ideology and a fairly broad sense of "fascist" which I
accept here.

There are regimes today which deserve to be called "fascist" and there
are groups with fascist leanings. In many European countries millions
still suffer because of the torture, maltreatment and deprivations they
or their nearest had experienced under fascist tyrannies, and there is
little chance that they ever get completely restored. The adjective
"fascist" is therefore rarely used in Europe in current political
debates except to attack self-proclaimed fascist sympatizers. To attack
others using the term is simply seen as indecent or a symptom of moments
of politcal insensitivity. The reactions were milder in countries which
were not directly struck by fascist forces.

Central ideological aspects of fascism may be formulated like this: the
strong have always prevailed over the weak, and deserves to prevail over
the weak. Join the strong! Human destiny and the guidelines in the life
of the individual is shaped by the state or nation-state, and through
racial characteristics. The implementation of policies must be in the
hands of the state, and is secured through the genius of the leader who
may use ruthless and violent means. The slogan "freedom, equality and
brotherhood" is unaccedptable. There is no brotherhood between the
races, no equality between leaders and followers. Slogans like "To
believe, to obey, to combat!" are acceptable. In the fight against an
opposition state terror is acceptable.

It is not peculiar to fascism but fascism is rather extreme in valuing
certain collectives higher than ordinary individuals: the Nation, the
Race, the Party. Some supporters of the deep ecology movement seem to
attribute supreme value to an ecosystem, a kind of collective, or to
every species. Species are also collectives of sorts. We may here talk
of "wholism" in a broad, vague sense. Example: Some say that they feel
"like a leaf on the tree of life. The leaves have an intimate,
"internal" relation to the tree". This borders on forms of nature
mysticism. Philosophers have described the "oceanic feeling", the
feeling of being a drop in a vast ocean. The drop vanishes completely as
an independent entity. But there is no struggle between the drops, no
races, no enemies. The image "oceanic feeling" has a very long history,
but has scarcely ever been used in military pep talk. The fascist
collectives do not have much in common with the ocean. And many
supporters of the deep ecology movement only emphasize close
interrelationships and interdependence. No devaluation of the
individual.

Clarification may start with inspecting general formulations which many
supporters find acceptable, for instance, "the 8 points".

The formulations of the "8 points" of the deep ecology movement are of
course open to slightly different interpretations as formulated in
Devall and Sessions in Deep Ecology, p.71:

Point 1 makes use of the expression "life forms". Some supporters feel
strongly, as I do, that intrinsic (or inherent) value attaches to every
individual living being. It is for me largely a question of intuition.
The formulation of Point 1 that suits me best would therefore start with
"Every living being..." or "All living beings...". But it should not be
interpreted as synonymous with "All living beings and only individual
living beings...". Point 1 leaves open the question of whether species
or other collectives have, or can have, intrinsic value. Actually many,
perhaps most, supporters attach intrinsic value to species. The
expression "Every life form" may be interpreted as synonymous with
"every individual living being and every species". What is, or should
be, excluded, is an interpretation of "every life form" as synonymous
with "every species (not every individual living being)".

One more point: according to Point 1 there is a value that is the same
for every human being, namely intrinsic value. This is squarely an
antifascist position. It is incompatible with fascist racism and fascist
nationalism, and also with the special ethical status accorded the
(supreme) Leader. Some supporters of the deep ecology movement are in
favor of grading intrinsic value. I prefer to talk about unequal
obligations and unequal non-intrinsic value.

Representatives of the science of ecology have often remarked the
supporters of deep ecology movement underestimate species. Without a
species of blue whales, there are no single individual blue whale. The
threat of extinction of the species is overwhelmingly more important
than the threat a definite individual blue whale faces. But the question
of relative importance is not the same as the question of intrinsic
value. The remote possibility of a dictatorship in favor of the species
of humans, or of every species, but negation of the intrinsic value of
individuals, is clearly unacceptable.

When fascist thinkers touch upon questions about the driving forces in
evolution, there is a tendency to focus on brutality and break-neck
competition and, of course, the stress on the evolutionary value of the
attempt of the stronger to eradicate the weak. Among deep ecology
people, the point of view of Kropotkin, his 'mutual aid' as an advantage
in evolutionary potential, is taken seriously, and so is the general
view of Stephan Lackner in his encouraging book Peaceable Nature. An
Optimistic View of Life on Earth, Harper and Row, 1984. "Violence causes
only 5 percent deaths". Perhaps too rosy a view, but deserving close
study.

How does Green political theory relate to theories of (ethical) justice?
One may say that they assume or at least presume a conception of justice
as fairness, but, of course, they do not find themselves bound to adopt
the notion of fairness as elaborate by John Rawls in his very careful
and influential work on justice. It is, for instance, natural within the
deep ecology movement to attribute meaning to norms about fairness
towards animals. Laboratory mammals are often treated in an unfair way:
the intelligent, "the bright" treated better than the less intelligent,
"the dull" ones, the beautiful better than the ugly. And what about
distribution of "primary goods"? It is accepted that monkeys may be made
use of by scientists in ways completely unacceptable if applied to
humans. But those who daily take care of a group of monkeys in a
laboratory are expected to distribute available primary and other goods
in a fair way - fair distribution of food and time in playing with them.
From point 1 no list of special human rights can be inferred. The points
are, it might be useful to repeat, primarily concerned with the specific
character of the deep ecology movement within the context of the general
ecological movement. The acceptance or non-acceptance of a definite list
of human rights, obviously not accorded to non-humans, is a question of
ecosophy, the total view of a supporter of the deep ecology movement.
Theoretically, it is compatible with the 8 points to be, like Gandhi,
sceptical about special human rights. According to Gandhi humans have
obligations, not rights. But when he explained what he meant in
practice, it turned out that we have obligations to behave towards
humans in accordance with the doctrines of human (special) rights.

In ecosophical literature there is no sign that supporters of the deep
ecology movement reject the lists of human rights. On the whole, the
writers have not expected that there would be any question of whether
they would, or would not.

The difference between the deep ecology movement and an ecosophy is
often overlooked. The characterizations of the deep ecology movement
such as the 8 points have essentially the limited function to clarify an
important difference of emphasis within the general ecological movement.
The ecological movement has as supreme goal to assit the overcoming of
the ecological crisis. An ecosophy, on the other hand, is a total view
in part stimulated or in part inspired by that crisis. As a total view
its concern is in principle, with every question a human being is more
or less pressed to take up in full sincerity - meaningful human life,
the relation to nature and to the cosmos, the basic priorities of
values, social and political philosophy. Very little of a total view can
be articulated in words - except by philosophers and prophets who devote
their lives to it.

The limited character of the deep ecology movement obviously makes it
absurd to derive any definite governmental and general political theory
(or philosophy) from a set of adequate characterizations of it. The
conception of Green societies should be elaborated with care, leaving
space for cultural differences. Deep ecology must never degenerate into
a sect.

A party which tries to develop a cult of ecosystems, or which tries to
identify ethics with environmental ethics, cannot be expected to win
elections or gain through revolution. Of the hundred cares people have,
none seems to be connected with the rather abstract doctrine of life and
death of ecosystems. They may learn about vast and important
relationships. If they are dependent on fish from the Barent Sea, they
learn that the population of fish they buy depends upon the population
of other species and upon the policies adopted, that is, upon the
necessary restrictions and solutions of international conflicts related
to them: ecosystemic knowledge. They may support ecologically
responsible policies, but they may not believe in the intrinsic value of
the system. Ecosophies are total views in part inspired by the crisis,
but even if they accept an ecosophy, the part played by ecological
consideration will be very small. I don't think we should wish it to be
otherwise.

The late 80s and early 90s saw a series of valuable contributions to the
so-called 'Green political theory' as something different from mere
'green political society'. Here are a few examples: Hazel Henderson, The
Politics of the Solar Age, 1981, Fritjof Capra and Charlene Apretnak,
Green Politics, 1984, Jonathan Porritt, Seeing Green: the Politics of
Ecology Explained, 1984, John Dryzek, Rational Ecology, 1987, Robert
c.Paehlke, Environmentalism and the Future of Progressive Politics,
1989, Andrew Dobson, Green Political Thought, 1990, Robyn Eckersley,
Environmentalism and Political Theory, 1992, and Robert Goodin, Green
Political Theory, 1992. - Fascist tendencies? None. Threats against the
vital rights of humans? None.

The distinction between 'Green' and 'green' goes parallell to the
distinction 'deep'/'reform'. Not a single of the above authors plays for
a movement with any idea even faintly reminding one of fascist or even
mildly authoritarian regimes, nor of any possibility that the Greens
should attack the greens if the former get to be powerful. The adoption
of responsible ecological policies - policies significantly different in
strength than the contemporary - is supposed to be possible within a
democratic governmental framework. But not only 'doomsday prophets'
engage in speculation about what may happen if the present passivity
continues, one scenario envisages the breakdown of democratic regimes,
and the reign of terror and dictatorship.

By attributing intrinsic value to non-human beings deep ecology
supporters may be said to accept a widened Kantian maxim: no living
being should be treated merely as a means. But the wideness of the
application of the predicate 'living' is of course open to different
views. It is, for instance, not necessary to include a virus.

As to non-violence, as contrasted with the fascist 'masculine
pugnacity', supporters of the deep ecology movement are criticized
because they do not answer 'strong attacks'. They are often called meek
and pacifist. Thus, when Murray Bookchin started somewhat wild and
immoderate attacks on deep ecology, there were no corresponding counter
attacks. The attacks did not elicit polemics between the two 'camps',
the social ecologists and the supporters of the deep ecology movement.
The latter on the whole only continued to explain what they stood for.
Even in the published debate between Bookchin and the 'wildly radical'
supporter of the deep ecology movement, Dave Foreman, there is a
characteristic mildness in the latter's formulations. 'The best defence
is attack' is not always a good advice. One should, of course, attack,
using Gandhian rules of verbal communication, that is, one should with
care formulate counterarguments against the views of the attacker, not
only defend one's own. As regards the relation of the two movements, the
social ecological and the deep ecological, it is obvious that one may
support both. The latter is broader, more diffuse, some will say. The
history of the deep ecology manifests a clear tendency towards radical
forms of non-violence.

Some critics do not believe in the danger of fascist tendencies in the
deep ecology movement, but in the possibility of the establishment of
authoritarian policies if the supporters get powerful: the supporters of
the shallow or reform movement might be discriminated against, such as
colored immigrants in rich countries. But even today the peaceful
collaboration of the two active parts of the general movement is a
necessity, and colored by mutual personal respect. Most of the many
hundred professionals involved in the questions relating to climatic
changes are, as far as I know, fairly uninterested in ultimate premises.
In any case the supporters of the deep ecology movement have no chance
to 'take over' the climatic studies, neither now nor in a future when
(hopefully) thanks to all activists in the general ecological movement
the ecological crisis is gradually overcome.

Implicit in some critical remarks about supporters of the deep ecology
movement there seems to be an assumption that they wish they were in the
majority. If we in the late 21st Century are ten thousand million people
it would be awkward if about five thousand million would feel the urge
to hike in the mountains, live and work in sparcely populated areas,
have a cabin somewhere along the fjords, and so on. Among the supporters
of deep ecology there are many who believe that ecologically sustainable
policies will be introduced even if they remain a small minority. The
job of social activists concerned with improving life quality in cities
is and will continue to be of central importance. But social activists
seem naturally to be in the minority except when motivated by economic
or nationalistic interests.

The late 80s and early 90s saw a series of valuable contributions to the
so-called 'Green political theory' as something different from mere
'green political theory'. Here are a few examples: Hazel Henderson, The
Politics of the Solar Age, 1981, Fritjof Capra and Charlene Spretnak,
Green Politics, 1984, Jonathan Porritt, Seeing Green: the Politics of
Ecology Explained, 1984, John Dryzek, Rational Ecology, 1987, Robert
C.Paehlke, Environmentalism and the Future of Progressive Politics,
1989, Andrew Dobson, Green Political Thought, 1990, Robyn Eckersley,
Environmentalism and Political Theory, 1992, and Robert Goodin, Green
Political Thoery, 1992. - Fascist tendencies? No. Threats against the
vital rights of humans? No.

I agree with those who think there is too much talk about the 8 points.
It is a sign of imperfect clarity about what deep ecology is all about.
The situation makes it necessary to repeat over and over again some
points which unite the great diversity of people who feel that they
strongly agree with lots of things said and done referring to "deep
ecology". To bring in the 8 points in the discussion may be helpful and
convenient, but, of course, they do not furnish any adequate picture of
the movement.
