1995X

Introductory Note on the Deep Ecology Movement

Arne Naess

If a democratic government today proposed an ecological responsible
policy it would be defeated. As responsible in this connection I would
only count a long term policy that would 'turn the tide' - initiating a
wave of increasing ecological sustainability. The government with an
understandable wish to survive can propose measures to diminish the
speed of the now increasing unsustainability, not anything approaching
what is needed. A small green party must risk to propose such a policy,
but major parties risk devastating decrease at the polls. One factor
that makes this certain is often called the schizophrenia of the public:
the majority may today announce in private that they consider the goal
to overcome the ecological crisis of supreme importance, but they
continue regularly as members of pressure groups whose leaders
consistently are supposed to argue against any 'harsh' measures which
affect their group. This secures ecologal unsustainability.

And 'harsh' the measures will have to be in terms of expenditures by the
rich countries. An estimate by UNEP and other institutions:150 billion
US dollars on an average during the 10 years 1991-2000. We are already
somewhat behind schedule! That is also the case according to the most
important source of estimations - the Worldwatch Institute. In its
publication State of the World 1988 there is an estimate dealing with 6
important ecological issues: a gradual increase of 149 billion US
dollars towards the year 2000. Because degradation and destruction
proceed quickly, an estimate today would conclude with a higher number.
And of course, it is uncertain how many years past the year 2000 we
would have to pay considerable sums. Reforestation, for instance, will
be very costly if ecological sustainability is considered to require
real forests and not only species-poor tree plantations.

What can make it less risky for political parties to propose realistic
ecological policies? As it is now, for example in Norway, the
politicians have experienced that proposals of any significant increase
of expenditures meet with fierce opposition. And it proves difficult to
fulfill even moderate promises. What can be done in this situation? In
what follows I shall point only to one factor among many.

There is today a small, deeply concerned minority in many countries,
rich and poor, who feel the destruction of nature as a degradation of
their own selves, their own homes. They are eager to find ways of
participating in meaningful actions that can 'change everything',
including their own lifestyles. Consequently they are prepared actively
to support any proposal made by local or national policy-makers in the
direction of what they think must be done. They are willing to make
practically any sacrifice, including a drastic decrease of their
material standard of living. Unfortunately they are in a minority - some
have guessed - about 10% of the adult population, others about 1% in the
rich countries.

It seems that this minority has much in common. Most of them have a
philosophy of life or religious beliefs which elicit anger, despair and
abhorence when contemplating what humans destroy for more or less
trivial reasons. In this desperate situation the people who gladly
support any radical measures gain confidence and increase their public
efforts through worldwide cooperation. There is now an international
movement which may contribute to this cooperation. I call it the deep
ecology movement, but the terminology is unimportant. The supporters are
increasingly able to articulate the deepseated attitudes that drive them
together. They tend, for instance, to announce the intrinsic or inherent
value or worth of all life forms independent of any narrow usefulness
for man. They demand respect for all life forms. They tend to feel that
humans don't have the right to limit the interference in the life of
other living beings except to satisfy vital needs. Obviously, what can
be said to be a vital need must be related to particular circumstances
in particular countries. It is one of the goals of responsible
ecological policies to make it practically possible for the individual
to live a way that ensures high life quality with a minimum of
interference. A rich life with simple means. A way of life that is
universalizable even if world population will double.

Deeply motivated minorities have played a sigificant role in great
social movements such as that against slavery. Economic interests were
overcome. In a sense the deep ecology movement is a movement against
human slavery under the selfdestructive attempt to dominate nature. It
may play a small, but distinguished role in the fight for decisive
changes. But the supporters of that movement are of course dependent
upon help from people who do not see any necessity to 'problematize'
every aspect of our present policies. Why involve philosophy when
science and revolutionary technology will do the job? Their support is
necessary in tackling but support the particular problems, like that of
acid rain or the ozone layer.

How does the deep ecology movement relate to two greater older
movements, the peace movement and the social justice movement? From the
very start of the deep ecology movement as an international factor,
supporters have been in close cooperation with people who are heavily
engaged in the peace movement. Actually many of them come from previous
focus on peace. Within the social justice movement or movements there
has been a certain uneasiness: should not the fight against poverty have
a priority? Can domination of nature be fought independent of domination
man by man? Maybe we have to fight the latter first. Roughly the answer
offered goes against setting up priorites. The three movements must
cooperate closely. Because of the inccrease of necessary efforts
required to realize broad ecological sustainability increases ominously
year by year because of delays, the time factor

makes it wise to do what can be done even under conditions of poverty
and man's domination over man. But it is obvious that the broad
sustainability envisaged is not realizable without substantial decrease
of armaments and of economic progress in the second, third and fourth
worlds. The term 'progress' rather than 'growth' is used because the
latter is associated firmly with GNP. As economic progress we think of
increased satisfaction of the economy-related vital needs of the
populations. This is closely related to increase of life quallity - 'how
one feels'. Neither factors are quantifiable with the relative easiness
of GNP.

Speaking about development versus ecology as goals of the developing
countries, supporters underline the danger of calling the rich countries
'developed'. Clearly a decisive factor is the capacity of the poor
countries to avoid the follies of the rich. The socalled 'green
economists' and others try to show how both rich and poor countries may
thrive with a kind of economy that combines life quality with broad
ecological sustainability.

The outlook for the future?

I do not think sustainability can be reached in the next century, but
the 22nd century has a good chance, in spite of enormous deterioration
of social and natural conditions in the years to come. Our
grandchildren's grandchildren will be enjoying what is left of the
richness and diversity of life forms, and people will live a rich life
with simple means. How far down we get in the next century depends on
what we do now.

It should be unnecessary to add that the supporters of the deep ecology
movement have different views about future developments, but even the
most pessimistic agree that we just have to do the best we can.

People in Britain have done a great job in supporting goals compatible
with those of the present international deep ecology movement.
E.F.Schumacher published his Small is Beautiful. A Study of Economics as
if People Mattered in 1973 and started a rapid development of 'green
economics'. The Schumacher Society and its Schumacher College continue
to provide an international center of collaboration. - The British Green
Party has a program of deep change, social and political. Many names and
institutions could be mentioned.

Social and political scientists point out that the transformations
envisaged by supporters of the deep ecology movement are unlikely to
happen. But how do you measure probability? And to what extent are we
ethically justified in dropping the unlikely as goals to fight for? It
is wise to listen to what political scientists have to say about the
absence of powerful short range interests that work against the needed
changes. But such information clearly cannot be permitted to determine
the main thrust of our actions.
