1995AD

Deep Ecology in the Line of Fire

Arne Naess

For those who not only support the deep ecology movement but also find
its terminology fairly adequate to express their attitudes, it is
encouraging to see how far seemingly vociferous critics really agree
with us. Far enough for warm cooperation. As an example I shall refer to
the 251-page book by Martin W.Lewis with the strong title Green
Delusions. An Environmentalist Critique of Radical Environmentalism,
Duke University Press, 1992.

In this book the diagnosis of the ecological crisis is as serious and as
severe as that of the deep ecology movement. And the goal in terms of
relations between humans and nature is as ambitious and radical as any
supporter of the deep ecology movement could wish for. Lewis explicitly
expresses an agreement of ultimate goal. Very encouraging! But as to
means he seems to have concrete ideas completely foreign to the
supporters of the deep ecology movement. Concrete in the sense that he
specifies what big "companies like Du Pont" can do for us. His type of
green society, a special kind of thoroughly and completely industrialist
state, is, or at least seems to be, diametrically different from any
green utopia envisaged by supporters of the deep ecology movement. Two
quotations from Lewis's work, one from page 16, and one from page 17,
suggest a new practical way rather than a new philosophy:

  "If we are lucky, the commercialization of photovoltaic solar energy
  will come in good part from struggling American start-ups like
  Chronar. It now seems far more likely, however, that this technology
  will be dominated by such vast industrial concerns as Hitachi, Sanyo,
  and Fujitsu (The Economist, 19-25 May 1990). The engineers, investors,
  and managers of a company like Chronar should be hailed and supported
  as environmental heroes, not denounced as technocratic and
  capitalistic eco-villains."

"The future may yet be in plastics. Let us hope that companies like Du
Pont can create artificial fibers sophisticated enough that we no longer
need to deplete the earth's aquifers, clear its tropical forests, drain
its wetlands, and pour massive quantities of biocides on all of these
environments in order to grow the cotton that affluent American
consumers consider so wonderfully "natural".

  The greatest hope for virtually complete decoupling may lie in the
  so-called nanotechnology revolution. (Drexler and Peterson 1991). If
  its proponents are correct, the nano techniques of molecular assembly
  will allow us to build superior goods using only a small fraction of
  the energy and materials /and square miles/ now required. Indeed,
  Drexler goes so far as to argue that by mining surplus atmospheric
  carbon dioxide we will be able to provide most of the raw materials
  needed for the next economy. Moreover, not only would a nanotech
  economy spare the natural world of any noxious pollutants, but it
  would also allow a truly massive return of land to natural
  communities." (p.17)

According to Lewis green extremists "seek to reconnect humanity with
nature, I counter that human society should strive to separate itself as
much as possible from the natural world, a notion that has aptly been
labeled "decoupling" by the geographer Simmons (1989:384)." (p.16) One
of the "fundamental theses" of his book Lewis formulates thus: "... only
by disengaging our economy from the natural world can we allow adequate
space for nature itself." (p.16). In order to massively restore the
natural landscapes, for instance those of England, I suppose not only
the number of cattle would have to be drastically reduced, but also the
square miles of agriculture. Theoretically, one may assume that industry
will be able to find high quality substitutes for what we get today from
the vast areas dominated by cattle. There is among the supporters of the
deep ecology movement a tendency to be sceptical about substitutes, but
the ecological crisis may eventually force us to extended use of them.

The new kind of industrial society Lewis believes in is not supposed to
necessitate change of the economic system or the representative
democracy. And it satisfies a norm: "Nature for Nature's Sake - And
Humanity for Humanity's." (p.17).

Lewis calls his approach Promethean Environmentalism and it "values
progress as much for the benefits that it may confer to the
human-ravished landscape as for promises it gives to the human
community." (p.16).

As a thought-experiment let us assume that the industries in State A
accomplishes what Lewis hopes will be accomplished, and that people vote
for decoupling, and that it is well on the way to succeed in large scale
restoration of ecosystems etc. Three gigantic accomplishments!
Incidentally, I assume that 'decoupling in one country' is feasible - a
sort of assumption Stalin made in contrast to Trotsky, relative to
communism.

Question: how would supporters of the deep ecology movement react? Would
they change their strategies and propose that the decoupling from nature
should start in their own countries? Some would, I am sure, say
something like this: "Obviously you would have needed a very strong deep
ecology movement in State A. You needed a strong endorsement of the
revolutionary (?) principle 'nature for the sake of nature'" Even if
industry happened to find ways and means to disengage the US economy
from nature, who would be personally interested in carrying it out?
Practically only those who felt that natural communities have intrinsic
value. Others would have found it sufficient to support policies to make
great ecological catastrophes very unlikely. In short the great
achievements in State A must have a deep ecology movement which
persuaded a majority to vote for policies which are as radical as those
suggested by Lewis.

Other supporters of the deep ecology movement are likely to hold that in
the long run the substitutes by the industry might have bad long range
effects. Some would suspect that it would be difficult to maintain
cultural diveristy.

Enough about the very hypothetical question of how supporters of the
deep ecology movement would react to the news of an ecosophically
successful, fully industrialized state. Let us have a look at the
critique Lewis directs against the 'ecoextremists'. It is not so
interesting because he takes some of the utopian visions and slogans of
supporters of the deep ecology movement not as such, but more like plans
of actions and blueprints of society. He does not seem to be interested
in the actual work the supporters do, socially and politically. Not the
limited goals of their direct actions, but their own crisis. This is a
pity because it may take time before industries invents the products
Lewis hopes they will produce, and in the mean time lots of
environmental conflicts need to be faced.

As to philosophy, Lewis seems to assume that if one is inspired by
Spinoza, one believes in the literal truth of what Spinoza writes or in
the validity of his "proofs". His positive attitude towards the
so-called postmodernism makes it natural for him to reject expressions
of (fragments) of total views, of Lebens- und Weltanschauungen. (Not
only Goethe and those who tried to kill Hitler, but Hitler himself had a
philosophy of life. So better keep off? No.)

The utopian dreams of some supporters of the deep ecology movement are
dangerous, especially in the United States, because "Americans as a
people seem uniquely drawn to such fantasies." (p.249). "By attacking
the foundations of scientific research and technical development,
radical environmentalism would hasten the decline of the United States
relative to Japan. In so doing, I believe it would threaten the
ecological future of the planet... . While Japan is ahead in basic
energy and resource efficiency, Americans as a whole are more concerned
about the preservation of nature - for nature's sake - than are the
Japanese. Japanese protests over such outrages as the mass slaughtering
of dolphins are the merest of whispers." (p.14).

Many supporters of the deep ecology movement are critical of the special
kind of scientific enterprise within industrial societies and also of
their technical development, but they scarcely attack the foundations of
scientific research (about which they know very little, I suppose). None
of the 15 or 20 theoreticians of the deep ecology movement attacks the
foundations. And no one suggests political means other than the
democratic. But they warn: great catastrophes may create conditions for
dictatorial measures. So, hurry up: vote for ecologically responsible
policies! And don't forget that the eradication of war and debilitating
is implied!

It is difficult not to feel a little proud to imagine that we the deep
ecology "extremists" may influence the relation between two giants
powers, and heartened by Lewis's reference to the preservation of nature
for nature's sake. But perhaps Lewis imagines that bioregionalists such
as Gary Snyder, lives a "simple, rustic life" and even wishes to force
others to do the same? To me bioregionalists seem to live a rich life
and they try (often rather unsuccessfully) to support appropriate
political means. Lewis is quite right in being sceptical about how many
young people would actually like to live in a severely democratic,
decentralized, homogeneous "rustic" society. It is difficult not to
associate Lewis's term "moderate liberals and conservatives" with people
in Congress and the Senate. But, as I have already suggested, I don't
see any possibility that they would formulate and fight for the very
strong policies in favor of "humans for humanity's" and nature for
nature's sake with large scale restoration of natural landscapes. People
like Lewis are needed and also people he would consider non-extremist
supporters of the deep ecology movement. They will do the work of
formulating the goals and of course they will insist that the long range
human life quality will not be reduced. (Humanity for humanity's sake!).
I would not be invited by Lewis to join in because of my inveterate
"modernism", but I am sure he would like me to read what the moderates
propose in order to disengage United States' economy from the natural
world.

In what follows I shall go into some details in discussing Lewis's
treatment of the writers he calls "eco-extremists".

What about the eco-radicals as a political and civilizational threat?
"If green extremism rejects represenative democracy in theory, its
response to existing American governmental institutions is one of
extraordinary contempt. Most eco-radicals would like to demolish our
entire political foundation, and many argue that all national-level
structures are inherently destructive of the environment." (p.40). In
the 60s the theories of peaceful anarchism suggested by Kropotkin and
others were adopted by many environmental activists. Later extreme
decentralization, like the panchayat proposed by Gandhi, was seen only
as a very distant possibility. Since the 60s the willingness and
eagerness of the leaders of local communities in non-industrial areas to
invite industry has been disheartening and made some centralization
inevitable. And few seem to like to spend their lives in local
communities. There must be larger unities, democratic countries, with
fairly strong governments - able to stop the mindless "development" of
areas not yet dominated by the rapidly expanding human enterprise. Not
one single deep ecology theoretician, or theoretician with closely
related views, has any belief in other governmental system than
democracy. That does not mean that they are not critical of the working
of comtemporary democracies. And the severity of criticism is not more
marked than that of millions of mainstream democratic voters. Supporters
giving vent to with extremist utterances (according to my own view) are
no danger to the main efforts of non-extremist supporters of the
movement, and if there is any sign of antidemocratic tendencies anywhere
I should like to get informed. An excellent introduction to political
theory suitable for the deep ecology movement is furnished by Robyn
Eckersley.[1] Dictatorships of any kind are shunned. Perhaps only one
development might be worse according to most of us: the possibility that
'nature takes over'.

It is important to repeat that it is the function of the proposed
so-called 8 points of deep ecology, to formulate in a few words what
characterizes it as a part of the general ecological movement. And
ecology is only one, however important, of many areas of political
concern. Peace, justice, economy, education... . They all hang together.
The deep ecology movement as such does not - as I see it - prescribe any
definite kind of governmental form. Its main political requirement is
that a government does not violate the state of intrinsic value of every
human being. (Point 1 of the platform.)

The quantification implied in the last quotation from Lewis - "most
eco-radicals" is interesting. Lewis quotes a few writers, but some are
scarcely supporters of the deep ecology movement. And in this movement,
as in other social movements, writers are in a tiny minority. In great
direct actions one has the opportunity to meet 'ordinary' supporters.
They are not 'ecotremists'.

People who have carried through empirical research, for instance Lester
Milbrath, conclude that deep ecology supporters and other radical greens
tend to shy both extreme right and left. Subversives? Revolutionaries?
If revolutionaries, only in a Gandhian way, and not more radical than
Lewis in his 'reformist' dream of disentangling the US from nature.

A social movement cannot live without slogans, but there must be
communication of a non-slogan character to clarify terms. From Lewis as
from many other critics, we may learn to be more careful with slogans.
"Decrease of material consumption!" is a good slogan but it must be (and
is) repeated: it is directed against the consumption levels of rich
nations and reading Lewis's interpretation (p.28), it must be emphasized
that it is not identical with a slogan. "Minimize material
consumption!". Why environmental masochism? The planet is immensely big
and rich. It lets a vast number of humans satisfy more than their vital
needs, and it allows them to enjoy some unecological habits. But the
annual "Gaia Gift" - a gift that Gaia bestows upon us to let us
interfere with ecosystems and resources on Earth - is finite, and with 8
or 10 thousand million people the per capita gift must naturally be
smaller than with, say, one thousand million.

The level of material standard of living of the poor should, and must be
expected to increase considerably. If their present so-called
'development' does not change character, but apparently copies Western
consumerism, then it is up to the West to change its ways as soon as
possible.

To minimize interference in the ecosystems is a queer goal: high quality
of life requires a substantial interference even if human population is
kept low and technology is ecologically much more advanced. Even our
quality homes and gardens require considerable interference. Again: why
environmental masochism?

Slogans suggesting that Homo sapiens is just one species among millions
of species are misleading. It may be constructed as underrating human's
unique, vast capacities compared to any other species. Proper education
develops concern for both humans and non-humans, but some human
environment makes such education impossible. Lewis chooses an extremist
interpretation of the slogan: the advocates of "soft variant" of deep
ecology to which I seem to belong "denounce all humanistic
philosophies", meaning philosophies asserting that humans deserve a
special status, or what? But perhaps I am not, as others, consistent
enough, not in any history of philosophy perhaps, in following my ideas
to their pitiful extremes?

One idea I am said to have is such that if I were consistent it would
lead to sheer nonsense, humanistic or non-humanistic. When I introduce a
new expression, for instance, "biospherical egalitarianism" I do not
have the feeling that it expresses a fairly definite idea or notion
before I define what the expression is supposed to express (in my
texts). But it seems too much to expect that readers accept our freedom
to decide what an expression should be taken to express in our texts.
Consequently some readers say that my idea of biospherical
egalitarianism, if developed consistently, implies such and such
completely absurd opinions. But a word is not an idea. What some authors
do is to disregard my definition of the expression "biospherical
egalitariansim". In its place they concentrate their attack on ideas
that might be expressed by the expression, telling me that if I were
consistent I would have to hold those for completely foreign ideas.
According to my definition the expression expresses the idea that there
is a value that every living being has in common, namely intrinsic
value. In this they are equal.

The view does not even logically imply that the intrinsicness has
degrees or does not admit degrees. Nor does it in any way reduce the
status of homo sapiens, its gigantic creativity compared even to apes,
the unique complexity of human communication, the capacity of
self-realization, and so on. In short, I could of course have used other
expressions, less provocative than the one I have chosen, but to me the
idea that living beings other than humans may only have instrumental
value, not intrinsic value, is important and influential, but so is the
idea that only some kinds have that status. This I found to be a
sufficiently serious situation to justify a somewhat bombastic
expression. But it seems that more and more people accept the idea I
expressed by my provocative term and it may be time to give the idea a
simpler name.

- Lewis poses with delicate irony a pertinent question: "But one must
wonder whether self-proclaimed ecologists affirming their communion with
nature through shamanistic rituals will supply the world with solar
technologists. I suspect rather that such delivery will come, if at all,
from high-tech corporations - from firms operating in a social,
economic, and technical milieu almost wholly removed from the intricate
webs of the natural world." (p.16). What have theorists of the deep
ecology movement meant by the word "deep"? A relatively thorough reading
of my and others' writings will reveal clearly that they have not meant
at all to classify people into deep and shallow. The acknowledged
definition has to do with a person's total argumentation patterns within
the general ecological movement. (I have reiterated in several of my
articles that to use the term "deep ecologist", and hence "shallow
ecologist" is a very unfortunate choice of words if not an outright
mistake.) How people argue in support of their decisions and opinions.
Why should there be a radical change? "Radical change is necessary"
(p.25). People who include arguments such as "for nature's own sake"
cannot avoid what has been called philosophy of nature. A philosophy of
nature tends to touch upon philosophy of mind and of the relation
between man and living beings. Feelings of relatedness, feelings of
concern for their own sake. Asked how they justify such an attitude they
do not find arguments, or if they do, they furnish premises of some
sort, but the process does not extend indefinitely. We must stop
somewhere as Aristotle insisted. Deepness of an argumentation pattern is
defined as bringing the arguing into the realm of philosophy or
religion. A Christian may for instance roughly argue this way in favor
of the intrinsic value of every living being:

Premise 1 God exists and what God has created has intrinsic value

Premise 2 God has created the living beings

Conclusion Every living being has intrinsic value

If a person argues on the basis of a kind of personal life philosophy,
it does not imply that this person pretends that his or her basic or
"fundamental" views are absolutely certain and authoritative. On the
contrary. In surveys we find that people are inclined to respect the
basic views of others. They are willing to stand up courageously for
some views and they do it on the basis which in part is a value
hierarchy. And that implies going deep from the point of view of
premise/conclusion relations. But deepness does not imply absolutism and
dogmatism. There is among some of those who favor a "postmodern"
terminology to associate deepness of argumentation with "fundamentalism"
in an odious sense. This is unfortunate. Today and tomorrow we shall
have, I hope, people who have a life philosophy, a strong sense of value
priorities.

Supporters of the deep ecology movement are activists within the general
ecological movement who go deep in their argumentation patterns. The
term "total pattern" is important because going deep in the defined way
is completely compatible with a fairly narrow, very pragmatic attitude
in specific environmental conflicts and with argument in 90% of
discussion in favor of cleaner air seemingly with the sole
'unphilosophic' premise that it is good for human health in rich
countries.

It is remarkable that Lewis can on the one hand continue to look at what
he calls the "dominant" school of radical environmentalism as a
contributor to the likelihood of ecological holohaust (p.26) and on the
other holds that what the school believes in will "vanish quickly in the
light of empirical scrutiny." It seems to me that this very quickness
and combined with Western respect for empirical findings should make it
possible for moderates to go ahead, come together and start the
necessary radical changes in spite of the existence of radical
environmentalism. There is no good reason to wait because some people
talk ("tout") about the wicked West, the virtuous East, the evil
industrials and the peaceful primitives. Don't be distracted by my
"rationalist epistemology and reductionistic mode of analysis.". Hegel,
Bergson, Whitehead inspire more people than Spinoza does.
"Unfortunately, the emergence of the social consensus needed to effect
change appears unlikely." (p.25). I agree, but as activists we have the
duty to try to realize the unlikely. I think we agree about that also.
But hopefully we shall disagree about many philosophical and religious
issues, including those which fascinate Spinoza.

It seems that some critics believe that a supporter of the deep ecology
movement disapproves of those supporters whose argumentation pattern
does not reach the depth of philosophical or religious premises. But the
former are more or less completely dependent upon the latter? More than
90% of the information, such as the risk of change of climate, which
makes supporters of the deep ecology movment so alarmed is due to
researches provided by people who as far as supporters of deep ecology
know, are uninterested in relating their argument to 'ultimate
premises'. If supporters of the deep ecology movement were alarmed about
the shallowness of argumentation patterns, it would show up in their
polemics, their direct actions and otherwise. But this supporter of the
deep ecology movement would feel ridiculous. It would gladden the
supporters of the movement if more of the latter occasionally would
deepent their argumentation.

Do supporters of deep ecology movementll admit and respect the rights of
their opponents to promote their shallow views? (p.64 in Peder Anker's
"Risk Management, Rationality and Deep Ecology"). But according to the
definitions, no definite views in the broad sense of "views", i.e.
something like "opinions" are "shallow". Authors within the ecological
movement differ in their (general) argumentation pattern. Arguments by a
supporter of the deep ecology movement in favor of better quality of
water in Norway cannot be classed as "shallow" or "deep", but an entire
argumentation pattern of an author can be thus classed. Some supporters
the deep ecology movement say or write that to be concerned about
philosophical premises is a blind alley, a bad use of time considering
urgency of overcoming the ecological crisis. (The international expert
on energy, Paul Hofseth for instance, tends to think that philosophical
premises were well enough studied in the 70's and it would be bad use of
time for him even to mention such premises in his articles or at
international conferences. It is natural for supporters of the deep
ecology movement to be grateful for his work. His argumentation pattern
is deliberately and consistently shallow. But to think of him as an
opponent of the deep ecology movement is absurd.

"How radical is the Deep Ecology Movement in its attitude to the
"shallows" with the "narrow" individual ego-realization of the private
sphere? The answer to this question depends on whether, and how far,
Deep Ecologists admit and respect the rights of their opponents to
promote their shallow views. It is highly unclear how far Naess would go
in "changing" individuals or societies that have models of consent based
on an individualistic, and in the case of MacLean even anthropocentric,
ecological understanding. (P.64, op.cit.). Suppose S is a green society
and that NN is a person generally thought to be devoted to
eco-realization in the private sphere. Suppose further that his income
and job status are about average. Suppose, as I do, that the economy may
still be of a kind such that individuals are restrained as to their
access to goods and services. Compared to present day Norway, there will
in S be higher prices of goods and services which are ecologically
expensive, such as requiring a lot of energy in production. There will
be lower prices when the goods and services are ecologically cheap. His
devotion to ego-realization will as now show intself generally in the
same fashion as today: dislike of sharing things with others,
embarrassingly conscious in every situatin of what is profitable for
himself as a private person. He may have more ecologically expensive
habits than others in the same income range which has to do with his
"ego" rather than his "social self". It is difficult to see how he could
get into trouble with the supporters of the deep ecology movement which
in a green society presumably will be concerned with the avoidance of
social developments in unecological directions. That is, why one should
expect that there would be more trouble as in our present society.

If we use the concept of individual annual Gaia gift, some members of
the green society may use most of their gift in January and February in
support of a club owning a motorboat of a luxurious and gas-gashing
kind - if such boats were still produced. But there would certainly be
some relatively high

prefer to spend most of the gift for relatively unecological and
egocentric purposes. Others will look down upon or laugh at it. Some may
even find it admirable that the society has has people with extremely
different lifestyles. And as a matter of course, it should include
people who would like to revert to an unecological form of society
paying no attention to future generations.

Speaking about views and not about non-verbal actions, it would be
strange if a society with responsible ecological policies should start
trying to eradicate theoretical opinions, for instance views proclaiming
at a fierce discount of future disasters.

As to "anthropocentrists", there are firm supporters of the deep ecology
movement who today proclaim themselves to be anthropocentric, but fully
endorse the 8 points. They may for instance have a coherent subjectivist
view of values, and find that the 8 points basically (at level 1)
expresses more or less arbitrary subjective opinions. But they accept
the points and try to live in a way believers in more objective
interpretations try to live.

[1] Robyn Eckersley: Environmentalism and Political Theory. Towards an
Ecocentric Approach, London, 1992.
