1995W

Antifascist character of the '8 points' of the Deep Ecology Movement

Arne Naess

The word "fascist" is sometimes used today in a rather loose way
suggesting cruel behavior of a power elite, or a group seemingly
intending to work for establishing such an elite. In what follows I use
the word more in contact with fascism as a historical phenomenon. Benito
Mussolini was the first to use the term, and his regime was the first
fascist regime. But the national socialism of Adolf Hitler is the best
known fascist ideology.

Central ideological aspects of fascism may be formulated like this: the
strong have always prevailed over the weak, and deserves to prevail over
the weak. Join the strong! Human destiny and the guidelines in the life
of the individual is shaped by the state or nation-state, and through
racial characteristics. The implementation of policies must be in the
hands of the state, and is secured through the genius of the leader who
may use ruthless and violent means. The slogan "freedom, equality and
brotherhood" is unacceptable. There is no brotherhood between the races,
no equality between leaders and followers. Slogans like "To believe, to
obey, to combat!" are acceptable. In the fight against an opposition
state terror is acceptable.

There are regimes today which deserve to be called "fascist" and groups
with fascist leanings. In many European countries millions still suffer
because of the torture, maltreatment and deprivations they or their
nearest had experienced under fascist tyrannies, and there is little
chance that they ever get completely restored. The adjective "fascist"
is therefore used rarely in current political debates except to attack
self-proclaimed fascist sympatizers. The reactions were milder in
countries which were not directly struck by fascist forces. There the
word is often used very loosely, as a word with vague, but strong
negative meanings. In the United States, the expression "environmental
fascism" is used rarely, but naturally it wakens the readers' attention
when it is used.

It has not been intimated that the deep ecology movement has tendencies
in any strict and historical sense of "fascism". But in a broader and
wider, popular sense of "fascism", some warn about possible "fascist"
application of the views as they are expressed by deep ecology
theorists, and readers ask for clarification.

It is not peculiar to fascism but it is rather extreme in valuing
certain collectives higher than the individual (except the Leader): the
Nation, the Race, the Party. Some supporters of the deep ecology
movement seem to attribute supreme value to an ecosystem, a kind of
collective, or to every species. Species are also collectives of sorts.
With a vague term, "wholism". Some say that they feel "like a leaf on
the tree of life". This borders on forms of nature mysticism.
Philosophers have described the "oceanic feeling", the feeling of being
a drop in a vast ocean. The drop vanishes completely as an independent
entity. But there is no struggle between the drops, no races, no
enemies. The image "oceanic feeling" has a very long history, but has
scarcely ever been used in military pep talk. The fascist collectives do
not have much in common with the ocean. And many supporters of the deep
ecology movement only emphasize close interrelationships, no wholism.

Clarification may start with inspecting general formulations which many
supporters find acceptable, for instance, "the 8 points".

The formulations of the "8 points" of the deep ecology movement are of
course open to slightly different interpretations as formulated in
Devall and Sessions in Deep Ecology, p.71. Point 1 makes use of the
expression "life forms". Some supporters feel strongly, as I do, that
intrinsic (or inherent) value attaches to all individual living beings.
(It is for me a question of intuition and feeling as much as a question
of logic.) The formulation of Point 1 that suits me best would therefore
start with "Every living being..." or "All living beings...". But it
cannot be interpreted as synonymous with "All living beings and only
individual living beings...". Therefore it leaves open the question of
whether species or other collectives have, or can have, intrinsic value.
Actually many supporters attach intrinsic value to species. The
expression "Every life form" may be interpreted as synonymous with
"every individual living being and every species". What is, or should
be, excluded, is an interpretation of "every life form" as synonymous
with "every species (not every individual living being)".

Representatives of the science of ecology have often remarked the
supporters of deep ecology movement underestimate species. Without a
species of blue whales, there are no single individual blue whale. The
threat of extinction of the species is overwhelmingly more important
than the threat a definite individual blue whale faces. But the question
of relative importance is not the same as the question of intrinsic
value.

The remote possibility of a dictatorship in favor of the species of
humans, or of every species, but negation of the intrinsic value of
individuals, is clearly unacceptable.

When fascist thinkers touch upon questions about the driving forces in
evolution, there is a tendency to focus on brutality and break-neck
competition and, of course, the stress on the evolutionary value of the
attempt of the stronger to eradicate the weak. Among deep ecology
people, the point of view of Kropotkin, his 'mutual aid' as an advantage
in evolutionary potential, is taken seriously, and so is the general
view of Stephan Lackner in his encouraging book Peaceable Nature. An
Optimistic View of Life on Earth, Harper and Row, 1984. "Violence causes
only 5 percent deaths". Perhaps too rosy a view, but deserving close
study.

According to Point 1 there is a value that is the same for every human
being, namely intrinsic value. This is squarely an antifascist position.
It is incompatible with fascist racism and fascist nationalism, and also
with the special ethical status accorded the (supreme) Leader.

How does Green political theory relate to theories of (ethical) justice?
One may say that they assume or at least presume a conception of justice
as fairness, but, of course, they do not find themselves bound to adopt
the notion of fairness as elaborate by John Rawls in his very careful
and influential work on justice. It is, for instance, natural within the
deep ecology movement to attribute meaning to norms about fairness
towards animals. Laboratory mammals are often treated in an unfair way:
the intelligent, "the bright" treated better than the less intelligent,
"the dull" ones, the beautiful better than the ugly. And what about
distribution of "primary goods"? It is accepted that monkeys may be made
use of by scientists in ways completely unacceptable if applied to
humans. But those who daily take care of a group of monkeys in a
laboratory are expected to distribute available primary and other goods
in a fair way - fair distribution of food and time in playing with them.
From point 1 no list of special human rights can be inferred. The points
are, it might be useful to repeat, primarily concerned with the specific
character of the deep ecology movement within the context of the general
ecological movement. The acceptance or non-acceptance of a definite list
of human rights, obviously not accorded to non-humans, is a question of
ecosophy, the total view of a supporter of the deep ecology movement.
Theoretically, it is compatible with the 8 points to be, like Gandhi,
sceptical about special human rights. According to Gandhi humans have
obligations, not rights. But when he explained what he meant in
practice, it turned out that we have obligations to behave towards
humans in accordance with the doctrines of human (special) rights.

In ecosophical literature there is no sign that supporters of the deep
ecology movement reject the lists of human rights. On the whole, the
writers have not expected that there would be any question of whether
they would, or would not.

It has been suggested that radical environmentalism, if it gained
supreme political power, would perhaps make human interests and human
rights surbordinate to the well-being of ecosystems. In the 60s, and
even in the 70s, some supporters of deep ecology had a near cultish
respect for 'mature ecosystems', but since the 80s the reification of
ecosystems has lost scientific ecological credibility. There is a much
higher degree of 'chaos', more instability, more complexity of changes.
For me to regulate my decisions according to a maxim that a good
decision is a decision that is beneficial to the special ecosystem in
which I take the decision, is strange and ethically objectionable. A
party which tries to develop a cult of ecosystems, or which tries to
identify ethics with environmental ethics, cannot be expected to win
elections or gain through revolution. Of the hundred cares people have,
none seems to be connected with the rather abstract doctrine of life and
death of ecosystems. They may learn about vast and important
relationships. If they are dependent on fish from the Barent Sea, they
learn that the population of fish they buy depends upon the population
of other species and upon the policies adopted, that is, upon the
necessary restrictions and solutions of international conflicts related
to them: ecosystemic knowledge. They may support ecologically
responsible policies, but they may not believe in the intrinsic value of
the system. Ecosophies are total views in part inspired by the crisis,
but even if they accept an ecosophy, the part played by ecological
consideration will be very small. I don't think we should wish it to be
otherwise.

By attributing intrinsic value to non-human beings deep ecology
supporters may be said to accept a widened Kantian maxim: no living
being should be treated merely as a means. But the wideness of the
application of the predicate 'living' is of course open to different
proposals. It is, for instance, not necessary to include the HIV-virus.

Applied to humans, I derive, as already mentioned, from point 1 the
formulation "every single human being has intrinsic (inherent) value
(worth)". But I hesitate to derive "Every single human being is worthy
of respect". I hesitate because for instance I would not say I respect a
torturer. It is meaningful for me to say that I can do something for a
torturer, something for his own sake. As a matter of course I offered a
torturer tea when he was being interrogated. After a long interrogation
he asked whether I could help him get shot immediately instead of being
kept in solitary confinement for a long time. I did not have the power
to make the authorities shoot him immediately as he requested, but
perhaps I would have asked them had I had the power. A human being
should be treated according to certain standards even if he had been a
torturer. There are strict rules as to how to behave towards a prisoner
whatever his crime. He remains a fellow human being. Special obligations
are due to one's fellow humans.

When people accused of torture were imprisoned in 1945, they were
visited by people from the Resistance and especially by Christian
priests. But the visits did not indicate any softness in regard to the
dreadful character of their deeds. Sometimes the terrible character of
what they had done made the visitors look at them as the most miserable
beings on Earth. People may be classed in regard to valuableness for the
community or for innumerable other purposes. Point 1 does not concern
instrumental value, nor the question whether there are different sorts
of inherent value. But what about gradation?

Point 1 does not imply any notion of quantification or gradation of
intrinsicness of value. It does not imply equality as opposite to 'more
or less'. Nor does it imply the absence of gradation.

Some supporters introduce gradation: humans have more or higher
intrinsic value than other living beings. Mammals have higher intrinsic
value than insects. It is difficult to avoid rather complex systems of
gradation. The more they are intellectually elaborated the further they
are from the more or less intuitive basis that I have for attributing
the same value, the intrinsic value, to every living being.

Instead of grading intrinsic value some of us grade obligations. Abysmal
differences of obligations! Also in the case of obligations a complex
system of strong and weak obligations lacks a clear intuitive basis. One
cannot expect intercultural consensus. As I see it (that is, according
to ecosophy T), humans have more, and very much stricter (ethical)
obligations towards humans than non-humans. Parents have more and
stricter obligations towards their own children than towards others'
children. Geography and access come in as well: nearness and easiness of
reach are factors. The intrinsic value of children is one and the same.
That children die of hunger is unacceptable, whatever the geographical
distance. In other words, there is an ethical obligation to support
measures to eliminate the phenomenon. The same applies to the systematic
torture perpetuated in many countries.

From the fact that supporters of the deep ecology movement are supposed
to be motivated (in part) by their philosophical or religious beliefs,
it does not follow that their decisions are determined by the 8 points.
The decisions should be consonant with their ecosophy, their total view,
something immensely broader than the 8 points, but which may include the
8 points. At North/South conferences it sometimes happens that people
from the Third World imagine that the 8 points are meant to give
adequate basis for their decisions. Rightly they object that the
ecological problems cannot and should not have the highest priority in
their countries. If being a supporter of the deep ecology movement
implies having such a preposterous view nobody in the Third World could
possibly be a supporter - nor should anybody anywhere interpret the 8
points that way. They focus on some difference between the outlook of a
certain group of activists within the general ecological movement and
the rest - and the 8 points concern matters relevant to the overcoming
of the ecological crisis largely caused by the rich nations which have
the duty to clean up. So much about point 1, and the relation between
the 8 points and their antifascist, pro Third World character.

In any movement which promotes serious changes affecting all aspects of
society one should be on the outlook for supporters who might ask for
dictatorial or authoritarian measures. None of the theorists of deep
ecology shows any such tendencies. And nobody who strives to be a
dictator is likely to profit from letting every human being be treated
as having the same inherent value.

But many supporters warn us: the longer we wait before responsible
ecological policies are adopted, the more likely there may develop
catastrophes which prepare the ground for undemocratic measures.

Point 2 announces the intrinsic value of richness and diversity of life
forms. In the book by Devall and Sessions the diversity of human
cultures is not mentioned. But recent versions announce that such
diversity should be included under the heading "diversity of life
forms", and thereby accorded intrinsic value. Not necessarily included
in the formulation of Point 2, but in the "first order comments".

- By "first order comments" I mean precizations, specifications and
elaborations which are clearly most needed in order to ensure that the
"point of departure" 8 point formulations are interpreted as intended.
It ought not, I think, to comprise more than ca. 400 words, the double
of the words of the 8 points. The second order comments may use twice as
many words again, that is, 800 words. I mention this in order to
emphasize that if we assume that the 8 point formulations are read by
people with greatly different backgorunds and emotional attitudes
towards questions raised by the deep ecology movement, one must expect
to talk at length to convey the intended meaning. And the talk may give,
and has given, good suggestions as to how to improve the formulations of
the 8 points, or work with completely different sets of formulations. -
[1]

Intrinsic value has an important limitation: some cultures have as a
basic feature an intolerance towards others. This intolerance and
discrimination is characteristic of fascist ideology. The democratic
political culture has regularly been the object of hateful and derisive
criticism.

One fairly obvious and easily made change in the formulations is the
following. In point 8 the following words may be added: "by peaceful and
democratic means". Some have objected to the use of the term
"democratic" because of the obvious imperfections of contemporary
democracies. But I think the term can be saved from being completely
identified in meaning with contemporary democracies. Point 8 then might
read like this: Those who subscribe to the foregoing points have an
obligation directly or indirectly to try to contribute to the
implementation of the necessary changes by peaceful and non-violent
means."

As to non-violence, as contrasted with the fascist 'masculine
pugnacity', supporters of the deep ecology movement are criticized
because they do not answer 'strong attacks'. They are often called meek
and pacifist. Thus, when Murray Bookchin started somewhat wild and
immoderate attacks on deep ecology, there were no corresponding counter
attacks. The attacks did not elicit polemics between the two 'camps',
the social ecologists and the supporters of the deep ecology movement.
The latter on the whole only continued to explain what they stood for.
Even in the published debate between Bookchin and the 'wildly radical'
supporter of the deep ecology movement, Dave Foreman, there is a
characteristic mildness in the latter's formulations. 'The best defence
is attack' is not always a good advice. One should, of course, attack,
using Gandhian rules of verbal communication, that is, one should with
care formulate counterarguments against the views of the attacker, not
only defend one's own. As regards the relation of the two movements, the
social ecological and the deep ecological, it is obvious that one may
support both. The latter is broader, more diffuse, some will say.

Some critics do not believe in the danger of fascist tendencies in the
deep ecology movement, in the possibility of the establishment of
authoritarian policies if the supporters get powerful: the supporters of
the shallow or reform movement might be suppressed, even put in prison.
But even today the peaceful collaboration of the two parts of the
general movement is a necessity. Most of the many hundred professionals
involved in the questions relating to climatic changes are, as far as I
know, fairly uninterested in ultimate premises. The supporters have no
chance to 'take over' the climatic studies, neither now nor in a future
when (hopefully) thanks to all activists in the general ecological
movement the ecological crisis is overcome.

The late 80s and early 90s saw a series of valuable contributions to the
so-called 'Green political theory' as something different from mere
'green political theory'. Here are a few examples: Hazel Henderson, The
Politics of the Solar Age, 1981, Fritjof Capra and Charlene Spretnak,
Green Politics, 1984, Jonathan Porritt, Seeing Green: the Politics of
Ecology Explained, 1984, John Dryzek, Rational Ecology, 1987, Robert
C.Paehlke, Environmentalism and the Future of Progressive Politics,
1989, Andrew Dobson, Green Political Thought, 1990, Robyn Eckersley,
Environmentalism and Political Theory, 1992, and Robert Goodin, Green
Political Thoery, 1992. - Fascist tendencies? No. Threats against the
vital rights of humans? No.

I agree with those who think there is too much talk about the 8 points.
It is a sign of imperfect clarity about what deep ecology is all about.
The situation makes it necessary to repeat over and over again some
points which unite the great diversity of people who feel that they
strongly agree with lots of things said and done referring to "deep
ecology". To bring in the 8 points in the discussion may be helpful and
convenient, but, of course, they do not furnish any adequate picture of
the movement.

[1] ^(?)The distinction Green/green corresponds roughly to
'deep/shallow', 'deep/reform', 'interpersonal/non-interpersonal ecology'
(W.Fox). There are several other terminologies closely resembling the
above. In short, roughly speaking a distinction similar to that between
a deep and a shallow, or better, reform movement with the total
ecological movement is widespread. This means that we have (descriptive)
data to refer to in changing the formulation of the 8 points. Or, of
course proposing a different set of points. As reformers of the
terminology we are not working in thin air.
