1996.I

Visiting the old 1973 conception of the 'deep, long-range ecology
movement'

Arne Naess

At the Third World Future Research Conference in Bucharest in 1972 I
gave a lecture with the title "The Shallow and the Deep, Long-Range
Ecology Movement". A 'Summary' was published in the philosophical
periodical Inquiry, Volume 15, pp.95-100. This short piece of writing
has been called 'seminal' because it elicited many positive - and some
negative - reactions in English speaking countries and introduced a
special terminology.

Could I have formulated the summary 'better' - that is, considering the
way it was interpreted, did I overlook possibilities of
misunderstanding?

One weakness appeared immediately:

The characterization (not definition) of the "shallow" movement was such
that it seemed ethically negative to be a supporter of the shallow
movement: "Fight against pollution and resource depletion. Conetral
objective: the health and affluence of people in the developed
countries." In other words, the central purpose of the movement was to
eliminate threats to a privileged minority. Through the centuries the
underprivileged had suffered from contaminated air, dirty water,
erosion, crowding..., whereas the powerful used this power to avoid such
nuisance.

The characterization of the "deep" movement in the summary makes the
supporters rather special people with far out philosophical opinions.
Soon after 1973 it was clear that we needed a conception of "non-deep"
participation in the (general) ecological movement which (a) wasnot
ethically negative, (b) took care of people who were active and wer
convinced that the environment could be protected without appealing to
any philosophical views. Perhaps limited changes of technology would be
enouogh.

The new formulations of the distinction have focussed on the deepness of
the chan ges necessary to overcome the increasing ecological
unsustainability. The deepness of the changes cna be 'measured' by the
deepness of the premises involved. Every assumption or presupposition of
our societies must be critically analysed; "problematized".[1] Clearly
there are, for instance, now, thousands of people doing research on
climate and on other factors of importance who are philosophically
uninterested and who do not find their job to involve their philosophy
of life. They support the environmental movement, but their motivation
is practical, 'unphilosophical'. In some sense they are as 'activist' as
those who participate in direct actions and who are in part
philosophically motivated.

The distinction between deep and shallow, or better, between deep and
reform, is today as important as in 1973, but cooperation between the
supporters of the two is a matter of course. The supporters of the deep
movement cannot possibly take over the work done by those of the reform
movement. There is no necessary competition involved.

Characterizing the deep ecology movement I unfortunately introduced a
complex term which invited musinterpretations: "biospherical
egalitarianism". "To the ecological field worker, the qual right to live
and blossom is an intuitively clear and obvious value maxim. Its
restriction to humans is an authoprocentrism with detremental effects
upn the life quality of humans themselves." (P.96) It was quite
unnecessary to use the word "equal". What was meant, and what I
subscribe to also today, is conveyed by the use of the term "same
right". There is a right tht is the same for every living being: the
right to live and blossom. Some supporters of the deep ecology movement
don't like the rights-terminology. Others think it is void to talk about
a right that is acknowledged to be unrealistic: Biospherical
eqalitarianism - in principle. The 'in principle' is inserted because
any realistic praxis necessitates some kiling, exploitation, and
suppression." (P.95). Suppose that I admire the elegant movements of a
certain one-celled living being in a tiny drop of water. Within one
minute the drop of water dries up and that living being is killed. My
spontaneous experience makes it adequate for me to say that that living
being had the right to live and blossom - the same right that I have. It
was unnecessary to kill it, but I experience only a very slight remorse.
My main point is that in so far as it makes sense to speak about rights
of man it makes also sense to speak about rights of other living beings.
But to speak about more or less right does not for me have a strong
intuitive basis. Therefore the word "egalitarianism" was a bad choice.
On the other hand, the premise "Equal right!" as a single premise is not
enough to derive logically the norm "If A and B have equal right to live
and blossom A should under no circumstances kill B!".

Point 2 of the seven points of the summary starts on page 95 with a
sophisticated, difficult, professional philosophical point. Its
acceptance cannot be, and scarcely ever was meant to be, a requirement
for support of the deep ecology movement:

  Rejection of the man-in-environment image in favour of the relational,
  total-field image. Organisms as knots in the biosphrical net or field
  of intrinsic relations. An intrinsic relation between two things A and
  B is such that the relations belongs to the definition or basic
  constitutions of A and B, so that without the relation, A and B are no
  longer the same things. The total-field model dissolves not only the
  man-in-environment concept, but every compact thing-in-milieu
  concept - except when talking at a superficial or preliminary level of
  communication.

Few people ar familiar with the philosophical reaction against
absolutizing a model of reality as the total inventory of things. The
most natural interpretations of the above passus are such that it seems
to go against every decent form of common sense. Radically watered down
it may hold its place. Especially when reacting against the
observer/observed picture of how we experience nature. We don't go out
in nature, but in discovering ourselves as much as discovering something
else.

Point 7, "local autonomy and decentralization" are catchwords of great
importance also today, but some of the lustre they enjoyed in the 60s
and 70s is gone. Again and again local communities in areas not
completely dominated by human activities ask for a factory or for other
symbols of high income and power. More centrally located authorities
often have to impose measures of protection of what is left of
(comparatively) free nature. Eggs of some rare birds may be emptied
concentrically around a village, that is, local people eliminate nests
near by, then further away. People far away are sometimes able to
convince local sto take only one or a few eggs from each nest.
Ordinarily locals are the best protectors, but it is now clear that,
unfortunately, centralized authorities are needed.

Point 7 is important because it examplifies the need for 'deep'
changes - socially and politically.

In the summing up" a definition of "ecosophy" is proposed which mirrors
past remantical views: "By an ecosophy I mean a philosophy of ecological
harmony or equilibrium", "a kind of sofia, wisdom". Today we do not
perhaps expect that nature ever is in a kind of equilibrium, we expect
unending conflicts of forces, and from time to time cases of protection
of nature against itself. We may sometimes justify interference in the
name of biodiversity. By an "ecosophy" I new mean a total view in part
inspired by effrots to overcome the ecological crisis, to turn from
increasing to decreasing ecological unsustainability.

In 1973 there was more talk in terms of class sosieties and exploitation
than in terms of hierarchical societies. Point 4 offers the catchword
"anti-class posture". "The exploiter lives differently from the
exploited, but both are adversedly affected in their potentialities of
self-realization." (P.96)

The 1973 summary makes the "deep, long-range ecology movement" too
narrow. The movement seems to favor one philosophy rather than one kind
of philosophy. "Ecologically inspired attitudes ... favor diversity of
human ways of life, cultures, occupations, of economies" - it says, but
the readers don't easily see how this pluralism follows from the 7
points.

Whatever the weaknesses of the first English version of deep ecology
movement, something was conveyed to many readers which made them say to
themselves something lie "Yes, yes. This is how I feel the situation".

[1] See my article "Deepness of Questions"
