1996Q

Re: John Clark: "How Wide is Deep Ecology?"

Arne Naess

The following is not a first draft of an article, but comments starting
with page one of Clark's MS. I presume that the reader has Clark's MS
available.

To read what John Clark says under the heading "Toward Ecophilosophical
Unity-in-Diversity" is for me like listening to beautiful music, and I
totally agree about what he says. The "unity in diversity" will be one
of relaxed, fair debate and the situation of learning from each other,
and acknowledging the value of (most) of what the others say, and
practically everything they do within the framework of the ecological
crisis.Disagreement will persist and will on the whole be a plus. We may
in ecophilosophy be supporters of ecofeminism, social ecology and deep
ecology. But this does not imply that we agree with everything said by
theorists of those movements. We have learnt a lot from each other and
will continue to do so.

Already at page 2 I find I disagree. "For a numberof years a "war of the
ecologies raged." (P.2) Some polemics, yes, but nothing like what we
find in most other social movements. When I heard about the strong words
uttered by Murray Bookchin I wrote to a worried American friends: take
into account that we are engaged, not in abstract, academic philosophy,
but in debate on policies - opposing proposals about immensely important
priorities. Total absence ofcrude polemics is very suspicious!

In short, I firmly deny that there has beenm a "war of the ecologies".
It misleads people who wish to know about ecophilosophy and its history.

This is a minor point compared to the impact of what Clark says further
down on page 2. "First, I ask whether an expanded consideration of the
social institutional implications of deep ecology would not increase its
depth, relevance, and appeal to proponents of other ecologies. Secondly,
I pose the question of whether certain tendencies to define deep ecology
in stark opposition to other ecophilosophies has not impeded the
original aims of the movement. And finally, I suggest tht possible
answers to these questions are implicit in Arne Naess's ecosphilosophy."

Clark poses three questions and my answer is "Yes" to all three. But
some comments are relevant.

Every aspect of society, and especially very rich ones will, as it is
said in the proposed point 8 of the deep ecology platform. On the other
hand, no definite change is implied. A set of scenarios are needed, each
based on somewhat different assumptions or diagnoses of what is the
state of affairs in different countries. Each will then try to outline
policies based on value priority (normative) views. As to economy, green
economists have contributed heavily both in description of the state of
affairs and in sorting out what can be done if ecophilosophical norms
are accepted. In political theory, the Green political theorists, note
the capital G, have in the last ten years contributed decisively. There
are no theorists who think that authoritarian or fascist regimes can
better overcome the ecological crisis than forms of democracy. I propose
that the three words "democratically and nonviolently" be added to point
8 concerning what has to be done.

It may well be adked "How would a green society look?" "How about the
many institutions?" In the 60s and 70s many of us (I mean
ecophilosophers) had hoped that very radical decentralization with
corresponding empowering of local communities would (roughly) be the way
to go But apart from some magnificent exceptions local politicians
backed up by a a substantial support in the local communities favored
industrial policies regardless of negative environmental consequences.
Interference by central authorities has been necessary, and I guess this
will continue to be necessary in the next century. As to green utopias
elaborated by supporters of the deep ecology movement, I find that of
George Snyder beautiful. Supporters of the deep ecology movement have
different attitudes to political green parties. The Swedish green party
has made a noteworthy impact, for instance in curbing the development of
nuclear power, but the Norwegian party has not been able to get 100% of
the votes. This seems to be due, in part, to a rather stern
'fundamentalism'. Personally, I accept that a political party must not
mainly think about strategy. Tactics is as important, and consider that
taskmindedness implies a rather pragmatic attitude.

A specific task of deep ecology as I see it, is not to propose policies
in the way it has been done in social ecology and to some extent in
ecofeminist literature, but to see them as important proposals withint
the scope of the deep ecology movement, as a wide movement.
