1996J

Heidegger, Postmodern Theory and Deep Ecology

Arne Naess

The above title is the title of a chapter in the book Contesting Earth's
Future: Radical Ecology and Postmodernity by Michael Zimmerman,
University of California Press 1994. The last 28 pages of the chapter
are headed "Heidegger, Naess, and Ontological Phenomenalism". My gestalt
ontology is a sort of ontological realism in the sense that we have
direct access to the contents of reality in our spontaneous experiences.
These are not mere appearances or phenonmena.

Zimmerman does not mention 'the 8 points of the deep ecology movement',
and that is all to the good because they are perhaps too often brought
into the discussion. But it is of some importance to immediately observe
that the questions the author painstakingly discusses all belong to
'level 1 of the Apron Diagram'. That is, they belong to the ultimate
premises. At this level the supporters of the deep ecology movement
recognize widely, in part incompatible views. The 8 points, constituting
the second level, are proposed as expressions of what the supporters
have in common on a fairly general and abstract plane. For instance that
it is meaningful to do something for a living being's own sake. (Cp.
"inherent value"). One supporter may say he does not accept anything
Heidegger seems to say on this level, or that he accepts everything. And
Naess is only one of the 15 or 20 theorists of the movement. Deep
ecology has never been, and will hopefully never be a philosophical
sect.

Some of the formulations of Zimmerman I feel need commenting.

"Conservation ecologists like Michael Soulé do seek to draw normative
conclusions from their disciplines, but many scientists feel constrained
to separate their academic research ("fact") from morality, politics,
and their own original love for living nature." (P.122) Michael Soulé
considers conservation biology a crisis science like AIDS research. It
may be said to have normative premises. The sentence "What follows if we
value positively and for its own sake the diversity and abundance of
life on Earth?" contains a strategic 'if', but the "we" does actually
accept the valuation. During the hours of research they do not partake
in politics, and they do not derive political and moral norms from
research. But conclusions based on research together may motivate norms.
And a set of research conclusions plus a single norm may have a large
field of derived practical consequences. In some senses spontaneous
experiences may be said to contain inseparable factual and normative
components. In verbalizations it is wise to keep the normative
announcements without an 'if' separate from purely declarative
statements. A good habit in serious written discussions is to end the
former with an exclamation mark. In that way it is easier for the reader
to understand the intention of the writer.

According to Zimmerman (and others) there are similarities between
Heidegger's and my philosophical views, and he places me (too) centrally
within the deep ecology movement. It is the latter point which perhaps
makes it useful to look carefully at what Zimmerman says.

"The visual horizon on which objects appear is not produced by the
subject; instead, the "horizon is but the side facing us on an openness
which surrounds us; an openness which is filled with views of the
[self-showing, self-luminous] appearances of what to our re-presenting
are objects." (P.123). Those who are not acquainted with Heidegger's
strange terminology should not feel worried. It is part of the tradition
to listen to his words and take seriously the associations we
spontaneously experience. Zimmerman adds to the above sentences a piece
of interpretation of Heidegger' sentences: "The self-luminosity of
things and the openness in which such luminosity occurs are not separate
from one another; they constitute aspects of the same event."

There are interesting similarities to be noted:

"Naess says that the subject-object distinction is not primary. Further,
he denies that there are primary qualities, essences, substances, or
even "things", if by the latter we mean solid, unchanging, isolated
material objects. Things are useful constructs for dealing with
constantly changing, internally related phenomena, which constitute
"experience". (P.123). I trust that Zimmerman has understood what I have
written in certain rather technical papers, but I cannot accept the way
he tries to formulate what he understands. "Constructs" reminds me too
much of postmodernism and suggests an activity on the part of us humans
which is too pretentious. We do not construct things. We construct
concepts of things - that is remarkable enough for me.

I say that in spontaneous experiences we have direct access to what is
real. We experience some things as solid, fairly isolatable and closely
related to others. But nothing absolutely isolatable etc. A crystal we
may experience as small and beautiful, the "primary" quality of
smallness, is not more real than the beauty, but certainly important
socially and in action. In spontaneous experiences things appear without
"effort", perhaps the Heideggerian terminology is helpful: phenomena are
"self-luminous". But I like to talk about things or items rather than
"phenomena" (Ontological realism of sorts?)

"If interrelated phenomena lack substance, essence, or self-existence,
as suggested by the Buddhist formula sarvam dharmam nihsvabhavam, there
is no ultimate ontological gap between self and not-self, humanity and
nature." (P.123).This sounds reasonable to me if we exchange "ultimate"
for "ultimate and absolute". What we call common sense is roughly right
in ontology as long as we talk loosely and with no philosophical
pretensions. I do not feel that I am subjected to something as
spectacular as an incessant play of phenomena. On the simple level of
"the 8 points", I am sitting in a solid chair and there is no play going
on. But if a graduate student of philosophy appears, I confirm, for
instance, that I am a possibilist: we have absolutely no guarantee what
will happen in the future. This is a kind of absolutism, but it is
within the framework of professional philosophy with some, but not
important consequences for my life or general outlook.

What I am driving at is the unprofessional sense in which I use the
expression "ultimate philosophical or religious views" when I say that
supporters of the deep ecology movement are supposed to be moved or
motivated in their environmental activism, in part, by such views. They
have value priorities, outlook on their own lives, what they are and
what they seek. They 'problematize' various aspects of society in they
light of their priorities. If they say they feel close to Buddhism with
its teaching about greed and other phenonmena of fairly concrete kinds,
it need not imply philosophical knowledge or interest in the theoretical
aspects of nirvana. Zimmerman opens his discourse about Heidegger, Naess
and ontolgoical phenomenalism with this intricate philosophical
announcement: "Just as Ecosophy T was influenced in part by the
nondualism of Mahayana Buddhism and Advaita Vedanta, so Heidegger had a
long interest in Western mysticism, as well as in Buddhism and Taoism.
This shared interest in nondualism brings deep ecology into proximity
with two themes in Heidegger's thought. (P.122). Excellent, but it may
make readers associate (1) too closely with the deep ecology movement
and (2) associate too closely the important expression "philosophical or
religious" in describing the relation of deep ecology to the ecology
movement as a whole with contemporary professional (academic)
philosophical debates.

Having expressed my slight uneasiness about the way he brings 'deep
ecology' into the discussion I shall continue here by meeting some of
Zimmerman's views more squarely.

Philosophers have been a great source of inspiration in 2500 years.
Mostly their sayings, especially those of great fame, can be interpreted
in interesting, highly different ways. Those who accept with eagerness
the sayings, or some of the sayings, tend to believe that their
interpretation is the 'correct' one, or at least they write as if they
hold that belief. If one is not primarily interested in history, I find
it better to talk about texts as sources of inspiration. In his article
Zimmerman quotes from texts by Heidegger and Derrida. It is a valuable
thing to consider those texts as possible sources of inspiration for
supporters of the deep ecology movement who have strong philosophical
interests. To my great surprise I find that parts or fragments of the
texts written by Derrida may be such a source. Consider the following
quotation from Zimmerman: "Deep ecologists agree with Derrida's
deconstruction of anthropocentrism, however, they resist this
deconstruction of nature, wilderness, and ecosphere, and they regard
ecocentrism as a desirable alternative to anthropocentrism. For Derrida,
however, ecological problems cannot be solved by turning the ecosystem
into yet another metaphysical absolute, since doing so is motivated by
the same control-impulse that animates all centrisms, including those
responsible for social oppression. He argues that we never encounter
nature either in itself or as a whole; instead, nature is a social
phenomenon, whose meaning is always contested within particular, local
discourses." (P.138).

The word "anthropocentrism" I take to express a sort of theory or a way
of thinking (within ecophilosophy), but words like "nature", "culture",
"vulture", and most others do not. It seems that Derrida guesses we use
the term "ecosystem" as a near synonym to "nature", and that both words
among deep ecology theorists are names for one or two metaphysical
absolutes. How Derrida has found out that and what it means is not quite
clear to me, but the seriousness of "turning something into a
"centrism" - and metaphysical absolutes are elements of the class of
centrisms - is motivated a "control-impulse". To this class belongs some
or all those centrisms which are responsible for social oppressions.
There is an escape from this demonic evil which has "generated crusades
and political systems that has wreaked havoc for centuries." In the
lamentable case of deep ecology it is important to realize that "nature
is a social phenomenon". I have seen convincing arguments against the
usual terminology within the ecological movement that every conception
of nature is made within society. But I see no possible way from this to
declaring nature to be socially created.

The views of Derrida cannot adequately be stated in such a few words,
and his criteria for adequacy are probably different from mine, but some
students who accept what they think Derrida basically means, also accept
the 8 points of the deep ecology movement. Because of the richness of
interpretations of assertions in postmodern philosophical literature,
this is not very astonishing. One of my conclusions is (again) that the
level 1 norms and descriptions from which the 8 points may be and
actually are derived reveal a great richness. Why not try to derive the
8 points from a set of views which includes those we guess are expressed
by Umberto Eco's following sentence: "... there is no Being that speaks.
There is a language that speaks Being... Language comes first... Being
is only an effect of meaning. Meaning is an effect of cultures. The
cultural universe is a labyrinth." (Quotation from Zimmerman, p.140).

But could we possibly derive the 8 points from texts which includes
sentences like "reality is a text" or "Everything is a "text""
(Derrida)? Why not? I guess Dave Foreman and others would feel
uncomfortable to hear that "being human means existing within a
linguistic play". (P.138). In seminars with academic philosophers who
are classed as influenced by, and highly positive towards, Derrida, it
is my experience that his sentences regularly can be transformed into
more familiar ones. After all, the slogan to deconstruct is fairly
general and is intended also to apply to postmodern texts when they seem
to assert something. We could if we, like Derrida, define this text as
an "openness without limits to the differential referral" and then
define "differential referral" in certain ways.

Zimmerman belongs to those supporters of the deep ecology movement who
seriously study and look for important help from the works of
philosophers which most philosophically concerned supporters do not
expect can be of so much help that careful study is warranted. I belong
to this majority but am grateful that Zimmerman continues his endeavors.
I have asked the editors of Encyclopedia Brittanica to give me a chance
to revise my Heidegger article in the 14th edition of that work. When
writing the article I considered the late works of Heidegger to belong
rather to a new kind of poetry than to philosophy.

Radical versions of Kant's "Ding an sich" philosophy is still
influential, especially in postmodernism, and will presumably continue
to inspire people in the future. According to this doctrine whatever we
say about nature, it does not apply to nature strictly in itself. There
is an eternal ignoramus, a "we don't know" to be considered. From this
follows that humans as part of nature will never be known. We will never
be able to say something about humans in themselves. But there is a
world in itself, close to us, we can only conceive shadows of ourselves,
features completely determined by our senses and our intellect. Today's
prevalent version substitutes society for senses and intellect.
Everything is socially determined. Interestingly enough social
anthropologists who adopt some of the concepts of postmodern literature
(Fredrik Barth and others) tend to 'deconstruct' the idea of society,
insisting that human interaction is much more complex than is usually
thought of in social anthropology. Strictly speaking ther are no
societies as usually defined in social anthropology.

- Then I shall talk about something quite different:

Unhappily, all-embracing systems like that of Spinoza are taken to be
dogmatic. Texts like those of Heidegger are taken more seriously. The
expectation is that the creator or interpreter of such a system is rigid
and does not easily change opinions. This is not a tenable
generalization. Historically, philosophers have gone through stages of
development whatever their kind of philosophy. Sextus Empiricus holds
that Pyrhonnic sceptics had a certain tendency to develop into
Heraclitans, turning into 'dogmatism', believing to have found at least
one truth. Dogmatists have changed into sceptics.

Those who try to integrate their views about life and the cosmos do not
necessarily show stagnation or ossification, not more than philosophers
focus on a small number of themes. Some start in young years with firm
general views, but tend later to give them up or soften them. It is
often said that they understand better the overwhelming complexity of
what they try to bring into a kind of order, however tentatively. So
they give up.

The importance of Spinoza and other systemsbuilders is that they present
Lebens- und Weltanschauungslehre at its best. I have recently lectured
on this in Germany where they say they are still somewhat reluctant
about L & W because of - Hitler. Or, because in Germany and L & W is
shown to be producing monstrous Anschauungen. I hope next century will
not be so occupied with language. And philosophical research more than
postmodern small narratives and cultural conversations.
