1996AZ

Re Zimmerman p.169ff in Drengson and Inoue's The Deep Ecology Movement

Arne Naess

1. Deep ecology in general does not favor extending rights to other
beings than humans. But such an extension is (of course) compatible with
support of the deep ecology movement. I presume most supporters see it
this way. To maintain that every living being has the right, as such, to
live and blossom, does not necessarily mean to enter the discussion of
rights as this word is used in institutions for human rights. In the 8
points it is said that humans "have no right to...". This word has here
a meaning well known in everyday life and has no judicial implications.

2. Zimmerman writes "In this essay, I examine the feminist contention
that both reform environmentalism and deep ecology are inadequate means
for ending the human domination of nature, because both approaches
ignore the decisive phenomena of patriarchalism and androcentrism. For
example, one of the most important of the reform movements in
environmental ethics urges us to "extend" rights to nonhuman beings in
order to protect them from human abuse. For many feminists, however, the
concept of rights is so bound up with a masculinist interpretation of
self and reality that it cannot serve to end the exploitation of nature
that arises from that interpretation." (P.169). It seems to me that some
concepts of "rights" have had good consequences in the fight against
exploitation and authoritarianism. I think women in the Third World who
use the human rights terminology do a good job. It is not clear how
their weaknesses of the "rights" discourse touch deep ecology which does
not depend on it.

Zimmerman continues "At first glance, deep ecology would appear to be in
agreement with the feminist critique of reformist environmental ethics.
Deep ecology maintains that the humanity-nature relation cannot be
transformed by moral "extensionism" or any other variety of reformism.
Instead, this transformation can only begin with the elimination of the
anthropocentric world view that portrays humanity itself as the source
of all value and that depicts nature solely as raw material for human
purposes. Feminists claim, however, that deep ecology obscures the
crucial issue by talking about human-centeredness, instead of about
male-centeredness (androcentrism). A truly "deep" ecology would have to
be informed by the insights of eco-feminists, who link the male
domination of nature with the male domination of woman." (P.169).

Zimmerman does not substantiate the claim that the transformation can
only begin with the elimination of a certain extreme kind of
anthropocentrism. He scarcely means this literally, but in so far as he
means it, he probably also holds that androcentrism is the main issue.
It is a task of ecofeminism to fight male domination of women, and we as
supporters of deep ecology may expect much from the possibility of
diminishing the tendency to dominate nature from the diminishing
domination of women. We should refer more often to this.

We distinguish "deep" from "reform". But perhaps we should add something
like the following: There are interpretations of reformism which may
contribute heavily to transformations. Especially when the term
"reformist" is defined in relation to "revolution". The deep ecology
movement may only be called revolutionary if, for instance, Gandhi's
step by step, nonviolent movement is called revolutionary. Otherwise the
deep ecology movement is reformist rather than revolutionary.

The idea that the change towards ecologically sustainable societies or
towards support of the deep ecology movement must begin in time with
something rather definite is widespread also among supporters of the
deep ecology movement. Some would say for instance that changes in one's
own life must be the beginning. But this cannot be said to be the view
of deep ecology, and there is certainly not a definite anthropocentric
worldview. The term is used in many ways. When somebody says to me
something like "Sorry Arne, I am hopelessly anthropocentric." She or he
may mean that her or his main concern in life are humans, not nonhumans
or the ecosphere, or the planet. This is compatible with support of the
deep ecology movement, and may be active locally. Because of this
situation, I avoid the terminology of being centered in certain ways.

The theorists of deep ecology should perhaps more often be talking about
malecenteredness than humancenteredness. Male values rather than female
values have dominated, and the ecofeminists do a great job linking
closely the male attempts somehow to "dominate nature" with male
"domination of women", for instance arrogantly to decide which are the
(limited) potentialities of selfrealization of women. Half the
population have been offered a limited way to live by the other half,
and the efforts to set limits continue.

Some theoreticians of deep ecology have been unsuccessful in their
attempts to describe the essential points of ecofeminism in a way Ariel
Kay Salleh and others find satisfactory. She maintains that the "deep
ecology movement will not truly happen until men are brave enough to
rediscover and to love the woman inside themselves." (Quoted on p. 170).
It has been a joy to see how common it is among women who take part in
ecological ("environmental") direct actions accept deep ecology views
like those expressed by the 8 points. "That is how I always have
thought" - is a more common kind of comment among women than among men.
(?) The dispute with ecofeminists concerns essential issues belonging to
what I call "level 3" in the Apron Diagram, causes of the ecological
crisis. There is still room for work on general human, not only
androcentric causes, as I see the situation today.

Zimmerman's careful analysis of potential real agreements and
disagreements between feminist theorists and deep ecology theorists
could be, and I think should be, completed with a discussion of
non-theorist views. Perhaps one may talk about ecofeminists, but the
term "deep ecologists" has been shunned by some of us from the very
beginning. The deep ecology terminology was introduced trying to put
words to a difference of approach, those within the general
environmental movement who went 'deep' in their premise/conclusion and
those who stopped at a level of technology, economic, and cost/benefit
analysis. The former seemed to be as persons deeply involved, feeling
that the trend towards decrease of richness and diversity of life, of
landscapes being not obviously dominated by man, was hurting themselves
to the core of their own being. The 'theoreticians' of the movement try
to put words to this, even fairly easily understandable words. Among
people who are not theorists often find it helpful to be offered ways of
abstract description of what they stand up for. People I would tend to
call ecofeminists may or may not be supporters of the deep ecology
movement. Whether those who call themselves ecofeminists find what
certain deep ecology theorists say about feminism in general or about
ecofeminism adequate or inadequate, I find inconclusive. For those who
place ‘selfrealization!’ as an expression of a norm, it is easy to adopt
an ecofeminist view. One half of the population has tended to deny the
full selfrealization potentials of the other half, and has been the main
factor in developing irresponsible ecological policies. But the same
interpretation of history and the contemporary situation may of course
develop within the deep ecology movement from premises different from my
own.
