1998G

What would be extreme deep ecology»?

Arne Naess

In every social movement one may introduce a distinction, sometimes
slightly arbitrary, between moderates and extremists, or between
moderate and extreme views. For reasons, some of which are not difficult
to guess, extreme views among deep ecology supporters are by
non-supporters identified with "dysanthroposic" views, views expressing
hostility toward humans. But the picture is complicated, because the
supporters are alos regularly criticized for having untenable,
"romantic" views about American Indians and many of their cultures. Some
supporters enjoy saying "Back to pleistocene»" pointing at ecologically
sustainable earlier phases of human history. It is therefore misleading
to consider these supporters hostile towards humans in general or the
species homo sapiens.

Extended care towards nonhumans invites the criticism that it implies
less care for humans. This is so because care is somehow considered to
be in a kind of bottle. If you spend more of the content of the bottle
on nonhumans, less is left for the humans. Against this, I, of course,
hold that caring may be extended in many new ways without lessening care
in the old ways. Applied to humans it means that they need not be less
cared for by extending care to nonhumans. There is aid to be about 2000
organizations promoting the rights of man. Their existence is not
threatened by the comparatively few and poor organizations in favor of
extending rights to living beings in general. Even if they get stronger
I predict that people who care for living beings in general will turn
out mostly to be people who wish that people should be taken better care
of. There are people living in extreme need of care, on the verge of
dying of hunger or of disintegrating from

When Dave Foreman was invited by George Sessions to contribute an
article to the anthology Deep Ecology for the 21^(st) Century, the
opportunity was there to retract what he had said, or allegedly had
said, for instance about dying Ethiopian children. Instead he made it
clear that, even if a distinction like that of "deep" and "shallow", he
did not feel he ever had supported the "academic philosophers" and what
they called "deep ecology".

"During the 1970s, philosophy professors in Europe, North America, and
Australia began to look at environmental ethics as a worthy focus for
discussion and explication. Sociologists, historians, anthropologists,
and other liberal arts academics also began to study attitudes toward
nature. By 1980, enough interest had coalesced for an academic journal
called Environmental Ethics to appear. Also, several university faculty
members, including Bill Devall and George Sessions, were popularizing in
the United States the Deep Ecology views of Norwegian philosopher Arne
Naess. An international network of specialists in environmental ethics
developed, leading to one of the more vigorous debates in modern
philosophy.

At first, little of this big blow in the ivory towers drew the notice of
working conservationists, but by the end of the ‘80s, few conservation
group staff members or volunteer activists were unaware of the Deep
Ecology-Shallow Ecology Environmentalism distinction or of the general
discussion about ethics and ecology." (Deep Ecology for the 21^(st)
Century, p.52).

What I have called "the deep ecology movement" did not inspire Dave
Foreman. He considered it to be a philosophy, "biocentric philosophy".
But he found the term "deep ecology" good, and adopted it. We are all
free to use the terms we like to express ideas we like. Foreman quotes
his Confessions of an Eco-Warrior: "We have brought the discussion of
biocentric philosophy - Deep Ecology - our of dusty academic journals.
We have effectively introduced nonviolent civil disobedience into the
repertoire of wildland preservation activism. We have also helped to
jolt the conservation movement out of its middle-age lethargy and
re-inspire it with passion, joy, and humor. In doing all of this, Earth
First! has restructured the conservation spectrum and redefined the
parameters of debate on ecological matters." (Idem., pp.54-55). A "New
Conservation Movement" was formed. "Earth First! could not itself gain
the visionary wilderness it proposed or shut down logging on the
National Forests. But, intertwined like an orgy of serpents with
environmental philosophers, conservation biologists, and independent
grassroots groups, the Earth First! movement played a key role in
creating the necessary conditions for the emergence of a New
Conservation Movement for the ‘90s - which can accomplish much of what
was first proposed by Earth First!". (Idem., p.55).

The heading under which this is written is remarkable: "Academic
philosophy". The role of "Earth First!" was to start a New Conservation
Movement. Today this movement plays, as far as I can judge, an excellent
role within what is called "environmentalism". (I do not like to think
of nature essentially as the environment of human beings.) And there is,
of course, nothing what so ever that smacks of fascism. As a supporter
of the deep ecology movement in Europe the situation since the
publication of Dave Foreman’s article in 1995 should be much easier. To
Europeans who constantly quote Dave Foreman’s so-called "ecofascist"
pronouncements, I can tell that he used the terminology of deep ecology
but at heart did not feel he belonged. To deep ecology supporters every
living being has intrinsic or inherent value (the latter word is
probably better), and this evidently applies to the very special human
beings. In some parts of the world "natural" happenings like eruption of
volcanoes or human induced unacceptable phenomena like torture or death
from hunger, causes extreme suffering. Humans have, as I see it, some
special responsibilities for fellow humans. I make sometimes use of the
slogan "Extended care for nonhumans, deepened care for humans". But this
does not, incidentally, imply that I find it adequate to talk, like many
do today, of humans’ right to clean water, clean air, and the other
ecologically desirable qualities. In order to realize these qualities
for every human being, whatever their number, the ecological policies
would have to be changed in a revolutionary way. We cannot order nature
to furnish more water. The water can be kept properly clean, but we are
not able to increase the sheer amount of water in accordance with the
increasing desire of more water. Deepened care for humans comprises
perhaps an effort to communicate this unfortunate view and to trace its
consequence: ecolgoically sustainable use of water, including ground
water.
