2001F

The Deep Ecology Movement

Arne Naess

Asked to describe how I came to develop what I call the deep ecology
movement, I shall mention some happenings on the way. Soon after the end
of the Second World War, in the late 1940s, I was invited to join the
Board of the Norwegian Alpine Club – a rich organization which built big
cottages in the Norwegian mountains where people could stay for the
night or for longer periods of time. To my consternation they planned
new cottages at the particularly beautiful places on the mountains.
Places where the cottages could be seen sometimes at great distances. I
objected that they ought not be seen at such places, and they ought to
be small and simple. Soon I left the board feeling that I disagreed
fundamentally with the policies of the organization. The mountainous
landscapes should be protected. Taking pictures in the mountains I asked
friends not to stand in front of a mountain. The feeling I had was
similar. I think of those who rejected pictures showing both God and
man. On a mountain ridge which I looked up to with particular strong
veneration, a tourist organization managed to place poles along the
broad ridge to prevent people from falling down the formidable
precipices. To me this was an insult to the dignity, the DIGNITY of the
mountain. I removed all of the poles. It was a victory for me that
people did not criticize what I had done.

So much about the religious veneration of the mountains in a wide sense.
Mountains have greatness, not only bigness. They are in a sense nearer
God than we are. One may be a supporter of the deep ecology movement
without this particular feeling and conception of mountains, but my
attitude illustrates the meaning of ”deep” in the expression ”deep
ecology”: it is an attitude of philosophical or religious character: It
has to do with ultimate foundations.

Since about 1970 I found that I had to find a way to describe the
essential points of deep ecology in short sentences.

The best short characterization of deep ecology I found could be
formulated as a set of eight points. The first asserts that every and
each living being has an intrinsic value, or better, inherent value. It
is meaningful to do something strictly for its own sake. I remember a
decisive experience which paved the road to this first point: Through my
small microscope, I saw tiny, nearly transparent beings swimming
elegantly inside a little drop of water. But when the water started to
dry up the movement of those living beings got less and less graceful. I
decided to save them from dying. This in spite of not believing they
could have feelings as they consisted seemingly only of one single cell.
I would like to do something strictly for their own sake. Probably I
found that, whatever their elementary stage of development, ”we” had
something in common: being alive. The first point of deep ecology makes
a kind of development of what I experienced.

The second point maintains that biodiversity is of value. The
preposterous differences among insects, the variety of butterflies –
amazing and wonderful, and of course we should not as humans cause a
diversity to diminish – which leads to the third point. The fourth asks
for diminishing human interference in the ecosystems – a ”scientific”
formulation of taking care of what we do, not endangering the immense
richness of life forms. But seemingly demanding a high, or even higher
and higher standard of living for an increasing number of people,
interference continues to increase. The fifth point asks us to stabilize
and gradually decrease population growth, for instance reach a point
where each couple of humans on the average have only two children. In
short ”it would be better for humans if they were fewer, and much better
for non-humans”.

Point six says that the realization of what the foregoing points demands
changes of all main aspects of society, not only technology. The seventh
point says that the changes imply decreased standard of living in the
rich countries, but not diminished life quality.

The last point says that those who agree to the foregoing points have a
duty to try to contribute to change the conditions in favor of the
realization of the previous points.

It has been my experience as well as the experiences of many others,
when lecturing and discussing deep ecology around the world, to refer to
”the eight points of deep ecology”. Today people widely accept the eight
points, but many ask: ”How do we influence policies? Influence
governments”?
