  The Shallow and the Deep, Long-Range Ecology Movement. A Summary[1]

  Arne Naess[2]

  Ecologically responsible policies are concerned only in part with
  pollution and resource depletion. There are deeper concerns which
  touch upon principles of diversity, complexity, autonomy,
  decentralization, symbiosis, egalitarianism, and classlessness.

The emergence of ecologists from their former relative obscurity marks a
turning point in our scientific communities. But their message is
twisted and misused. A shallow, but presently rather powerful movement,
and a deep, but less influential movement, compete for our attention. I
shall make an effort to characterize the two.

1.  The Shallow Ecology movement:

Fight against pollution and resources depletion. Central objective: the
health and affluence of people in the developed countries.

2.  The Deep Ecology movement:

  (1) Rejection of the man-in-environment image in favour of the
  relational, total-field image. Organisms as knots in the biospherical
  net or field of intrinsic relations. An intrinsic relation between two
  things A and B is such that the relation belongs to the definitions or
  basic constitutions of A and B, so that without the relation, A and B
  are no longer the same things. The total-field model dissolves not
  only the man-in-environment concept, but every compact thing-in-milieu
  concept – except when talking at a superficial or preliminary level of
  communication.

  (2) Biospherical egalitarianism – in principle. The ’in principle’
  clause is inserted because any realistic praxis necessitates some
  killing, exploitation, and supppression. The ecological field-worker
  acquires a deep-seated respect, or even veneration, for ways and forms
  of life. He reaches an understanding from within, a kind of
  understanding that other reserve for fellow men and for a narrow
  section of ways and forms of life. To the ecological field-worker, the
  equal right to live and blossom is an intuitively clear and obvious
  value axiom. Its restriction to humans is an anthropocentrism with
  detrimental effects upon the life quality of humans themselves. This
  quality depends in part upon the deep pleasure and satisfaction we
  receive from close partnership with other forms of life. The attempt
  to ignore our dependence and to establish a master-slave role has
  contributed to the alienation of man from himself.

  Ecological egalitarianism implies the reinterpretation of the
  future-research variable, ’level of crowding’, so that general
  mammalian crowding and loss of life-equality is taken seriously, not
  only human crowding. (Research on the high requirements of free space
  of certain mammals has, incidentally, suggested that theorists of
  human urbanism have largely underestimated human life-space
  requirements. Behavioural crowding symptoms [neuroses, aggressiveness,
  loss of traditions...] are largely the same among mammals.)

  (3) Principles of diversity and of symbiosis. Diversity enhances the
  potentialities of survival, the chances of new modes of life, the
  richness of forms. And the so-called struggle of life, and survival of
  the fittest, should be interpreted in the sense of ability to coexist,
  and suppress. ’Live and let live’ is a more powerful ecological
  principle than ’Either you or me’.

The latter tends to reduce the multiplicity of kinds of forms of life,
and also to create destruction within the communities of the same
species. Ecologically inspired attitudes therefore favour diversity of
human ways of life, of cultures, of occupations, of economies. They
support the fight against economic and cultural, as much as military,
invasion and domination, and they are opposed to the annihilation of
seals and whales as much as to that of human tribes or cultures.

(4) Anti-class posture. Diversity of human ways of life is in part due
to (intended or unintended) exploitation and suppression on the part of
certain groups. The exploiter lives differently from the exploited, but
both are adversely affected in their potentialities of self-realization.
The principle of diversity does not cover differences due merely to
certain attitudes or behaviours forcibly blocked or restrained. The
principles of ecological egalitarianism and of symbiosis support the
same anti-class posture. The ecological attitude favours the extension
of all three principles to any group conflicts, including those to today
between extreme caution towards any over-all plans for the future,
except those consistent with wide and widening classless diversity.

(5) Fight against pollution and resource depletion. In this fight
ecologists have found powerful supporters, but sometimes to the
detriment of their total stand. This happens when attention is focused
on pollution and resource depletion rather than on the other points, or
when projects are implemented which reduce pollution but increase evils
of the other kinds. Thus, if prices of life necessities increase because
of the installation of anti-pollution devices, class differences
increase too. An ethics of responsibility implies that ecologists do not
serve the shallow, but the deep ecological movement. That is, not only
point (5), but all seven points must be considered together.

Ecologists are irreplaceable informants in any society, whatever their
political colour. If well organized, they have the power to reject jobs
in which they submit themselves to institutions or to planners with
limited ecological perspectives. As it is now, ecologists sometimes
serve masters who deliberately ignore the wider perspectives.

(6) Complexity, not complication. The theory of ecosystems contains an
important distinction between what is complicated without any Gestalt or
unifying principles – we may think of finding our way through a chaotic
city – and what is complex. A multiplicity of more or less lawful,
interacting factors may operate together to form a unity, a system. We
make a shoe or use a map or integrate a variety of activities into a
workaday pattern. Organisms, ways of life, and interactions in the
biosphere in general, exhibit complexity of such an astoundingly high
level as to colour the general outlook of ecologists. Such complexity
makes thinking in terms of vast systems inevitable. It also makes for a
keen, steady perception of the profound human ignorance of biospherical
relationships and therefore of the effect of disturbance.

Applied to humans the complexity-not-complication principle favours
division of labour, not fragmentation of labour. It favours integrated
actions in which the whole person is active, not merely reactions. It
favours complex economies, an integrated variety of means of living.
(Combinations of industrial and agricultural activity, of intellectual
and manual work, of specialized and non-specialized occupations, of
urban and non-urban activity, of work in city and recreation in nature
with recreation in city and work in nature...)

It favours soft technique and ’soft future-research’, less prognosis,
more clarification of possibilities. More sensitivity towards continuity
and live traditions, and – most importantly – towards our state of
ignorance.

The implementation of ecologically responsible policies requires in this
century an exponential growth of technical skill and invention – but in
new directions, directions which today are not consistently and
liberally supported by the research policy organs of our nation-states.

(7) Local autonomy and decentralization. The vulnerability of a form of
life is roughly proportional to the weight of influence from afar, from
outside the local region in which that form has obtained an ecological
equilibrium. This lends support to our efforts to strengthen local
self-government and material and mental self-sufficiency. But these
efforts presuppose an impetus towards decentralization. Pollution
problems, including those of thermal pollution and recirculation of
materials, also lead us in this direction, because increased local
autonomy, if we are able to keep other factors constant, reduces energy
consumption. (Compare an approximately self-sufficient locality with one
requiring the importation of foodstuff, materials for house
construction, fuel and skilled labour from other continents. The former
may use only five per cent of the energy used by the latter). Local
autonomy is strengthened by a reduction in the number of links in the
hierarchical chains of decision. (For example a chain consisting of
local board, municipal council, highest sub-national decision-maker, a
state-wide institution in a state federation, a federal national
government institution, a coalition of nations, and of institutions,
e.g. E.E.C. top levels, and a global institution, can be reduced to one
made up of local board, follow majority rules at each step, many local
interests may be dropped along the line, if it is too long.

  Summing up, then, it should, first of all, be borne in mind that the
  norms and tendencies of the Deep Ecology movement are not derived from
  ecology by logic or induction. Ecological knowledge and the life-style
  of the ecological field-worker have suggested, inspired, and fortified
  the perspectives of the Deep Ecology movement. Many of the
  formulations in the above seven-point survey are rather vague
  generalizations, only tenable if made more precise in certain
  directions. But all over the world the inspiration from ecology has
  shown remarkable convergencies. The survey does not pretend to be more
  than one of the possible condensed codification of these
  convergencies.

  Secondly, it should be fully appreciated that the significant tenets
  of the Deep Ecology movement are clearly and forcefully normative.
  They express a value priority system only in part based on results (or
  lack of results, cf. point [6]) of scientific research. Today,
  ecologists try to influence policy-making bodies largely through
  threats, through predictions concerning pollutants and resource
  depletion, knowing that policy-makers accept at least certain minimum
  norms concerning health and just distribution. But it is clear that
  there is a vast number of people in all countries, and even a
  considerable number of people in power, who accept as valid the wider
  norms and values characteristic of the Deep Ecology movement. There
  are political potentials in this movement which should not be
  overlooked and which have little to do with pollution and resource
  depletion. In plotting possible futures, the norms should be freely
  used and elaborated.

  Thirdly, in so far as ecology movements deserve our attention, they
  are ecophilosophical rather than ecological. Ecology is a limited
  science which makes use of scientific methods. Philosophy is the most
  general forum of debate on fundamentals, descriptive as well as
  prescriptive, and political philosophy is one of its subsections. By
  an ecosophy I mean a philosophy of ecological harmony or equilibrium.
  A philosophy as a kind of sofia wisdom, is openly normative, it
  contains both norms, rules, postulates, value priority announcements
  and hypotheses concerning the state of affairs in our universe. Wisdom
  is policy wisdom, prescription, not only scientific description and
  prediction.

  The details of an ecosophy will show many variations due to
  significant differences concerning not only ’facts’ of pollution,
  resources, population, etc., but also value priorities. Today,
  however, the seven points listed provide one unified framework for
  ecosophical systems.

  In general system theory, systems are mostly conceived in terms of
  causally or functionally interacting or interrelated items. An
  ecosophy, however, is more like a system of the kind constructed by
  Aristotle or Spinoza. It is expressed verbally as a set of sentences
  with a variety of functions, descriptive and prescriptive. The basic
  relation is that between subsets of premisses and subsets of
  conclusions, that is, the relation of derivability. The relevant
  notions of derivability may be classed according to rigour, with
  logical and mathematical deductions topping the list, but also
  according to how much is implicitly taken for granted. An exposition
  of an ecosophy must necessarily be only moderately precise considering
  the vast scope of relevant ecological and normative (social,
  political, ethical) material. At the moment, ecosophy might profitably
  use models of systems, rough approximations of global
  systematizations. It is the global character, not preciseness in
  detail, which distinguishes an ecosophy. It articulates and integrates
  the efforts of an ideal ecological team, a team comprising not only
  scientists from an extreme variety of disciplines, but also students
  of politics and active policy-makers.

  Under the name of ecologism, various deviations from the deep movement
  have been championed - primarily with a one-sided stress on pollution
  and resource depletion, but also with a neglect of the great
  differences between under- and over-developed countries in favour of a
  vague global approach. The global approach is essential, but regional
  differences must largely determine policies in the coming years.

  SELECTED LITERATURE

  Commoner, B., The Closing Circle: Nature, Man and Technology, Alfred
  A.Knopf, New York 1971.

  Ehrlich, P.R. and A.H., Population, Resources, Environment: Issues in
  Human Ecology, 2^(nd) ed., W.H.Freeman & Co., San Francisco 1972.

  Ellul, J., The Technological Society, English ed., Alfred A.Knopf, New
  York 1964.

  Glacken, C.J., Traces on the Rhodian Shore. Nature and Culture in
  Western Thought, University of California Press, Berkeley 1967.

  Kato, H., ’The Effects of Crowding’, Quality of Life Conference,
  Oberhausen, April 1972.

  MaHarg, Ian L., Design with Nature, 1969. Paperback 1971, Doubleday &
  Co., New York.

  Meynaud, J., Technocracy, English ed., Free Press of Glencoe, Chicago
  1969.

  Mishan, E.J., Technology and Growth: The Price We Pay, Frederick A.
  Praeger, New York 1970.

  Odum, E.P., Fundamentals of Ecology, 3^(rd) ed., W.E. Saunders Co.,
  Philadelphia 1971.

  Shepard, Paul, Man in the Landscape, A.A. Knopf, New York.

[1] Summary of an Introductory Lecture at the 3^(rd) World Future
Research Conference, Bucharest, 3-10 September 1972. The lecture itself
will be published as part of the Proceedings of the meeting. Published
in Inquiry 16, 95-100, 1973.

[2] University of Oslo
