List of lifestyle trends within the deep ecology movement

Arne Naess

(1) Use of simple means, avoidance of unnecessary complicated intruments
and other sorts of means.

(2) Choice of activities most directly serving values in themselves and
having intrinsic value. Avoidance of activities which are merely
auxiliary, having no intrinsic value, or being many stages away from
fundamental goals.

(3) Anti-consumerism. This negative attitude follows from (1) and (2).

(4) Endeavour to maintain and increase the sensitivity and appreciation
of goods of which there is enough for all to enjoy.

(5) Absence or low degree of novophili - the love of what is new merely
because it is new.

(6) Effort to dwell in situations of intrinsic value and to act rather
than being busy.

(7) Appreciation of ethnic and cultural differences among people, not
feeling them as threats.

(8) Concern about the situation of the Third and the Fourth Worlds and
attempt to avoid a standard of living too much

different from and higher than the needy. (Global solidarity of
lifestyle.)

(9) Appreciation of lifestyles which are universalizable, which are not
blatantly impossible to sustain without injustice toward fellow humans
or other species.

(10)To go for depth and richness of experience rather than intensity.

(11)To appreciate and choose, when possible, meaningful work rather than
just making a living.

(12)To lead a complex, not a complicated life, trying to realize as many
aspects of positive experiences as possible within each time-interval.

(13)Cultivating life in community (Gemeinschaft) rather than in society
(Gesellschaft).

(14)Appreciation of, or participation in, primary production - small
scale agriculture, forestry, fishing.

(15)Effort to satisfy vital needs rather than desires.

(16)Attempts to live in nature rather than just visiting beautiful
places, avoidance of tourism (but occasionally making use of tourist
facilities).

(17)When in vulnerable nature live 'light and traceless'.

(18)Tendency to appreciate all life-forms rather than merely those
considered beautiful, remarkable or narrowly useful.

(19)Never use life forms merely as means. Remain conscious of their
intrinsic value and dignity even when using them as resources.

(20)When there is a conflict between interests of dogs and cats (and
other pet animals) and wild species, a tendency to protect the latter.

(21)Effort to protect local ecosystems, not only individual life forms,
feeling one's own community as part of ecosystems.

(22)Not only to deplore the excessive interference in nature as
unnecesssary, unreasonable and disrespectful, but to condemn it as
insolent, atrocious, outrageous and criminal - without condemning the
people responsible for the interference.

(23)Try to act resolutely and without cowardice in conflicts, but to
remain non-violent in words and deeds.

(24)Take part in or support non-violent direct action when other ways of
action fail.

7(25)Vegetarianism.
