Ecoforestry and the deep ecology movement

Arne Naess

In Canada and other countries ecoforestry has close links to the
so-called "Deep Ecology Movement". My attempt to characterise this
movement in about 200 words has resulted in the following 8
formulations. They are supposed to express some fairly general and
abstract points which most supporters of the movement agree upon.

1. The well-being and flourishing of human and non-human Life on Earth
have value in themselves (synonyms: intrinsic value, inherent value).
These values are independent of the usefulness of the non-human world
for human purposes.

2. Richness and diversity of life forms contribute to the realization of
these values and are also values in themselves.

3. Humans have no right to reduce this richness and diversity except to
satisfy vital needs.

4. It would be better for humans, and much better for non-humans, if
there were fewer human beings.

5. Present human interference with the non-human world is excessive, and
the situation is worsening.

6. Policies must therefore be changed. These policies affect basic
economic, technological, and ideological structures. The resulting state
of affairs will be deeply different from the present.

7. The ideological change is mainly that of appreciating life quality
(dwelling in situations of inherent value) rather than adhering to an
increasingly higher standard of living. There will be a profound
awareness of the difference between big and great.

8. Those who subscribe to the foregoing points have an obligation
directly or indirectly to try to implement necessary changes by
democratic and nonviolent means.

Application of these points to the forestry practice today has resulted
in some closely related announcements. One of them reads as follows:

The Ecoforestry’s Way: An Oath of Ecologically Responsible Forest Use

1. We shall respect, hold sacred, and learn from the ecological wisdom
(ecosophy) of natural forests with their multitudes of beings;

2. We shall protect the integrity of the full functioning forests;

3. We shall not use agricultural practices on the forest;

4. We shall remove from forests only values which are in abundance and
to meet vital human needs;

5. We shall remove individual instances of values only when this removal
does not interfere with full functioning forests: when in doubt, we will
not;

6. We shall minimize the impacts of our actions on the forest by using
only appropriate, low impact technology practices;

7. We shall use only non-violent resistance (e.g. Gandhian methods) in
our protection of the forests;

8. We shall do good work and uphold the Ecoforesters’s Way as a sacred
duty and trust.

(International Journal of Ecoforestry, Vol.10, No.2, 1994, p.82)

This declaration is characteristic of the most spiritual groups within
the Deep Ecology movement. Other groups would not use the term "sacred",
but would certainly stress human responsibility to protect the forest
ecosystems and long range, ecologically sustainable use of forests for
human purposes. The groups who are concerned with the political aspects
of high level ecoforestry stress among other things its "labor
intensity" as opposed to the "capital intensity" of the present
industrial forestry. Transition to high level ecoforestry would decrease
unemployment.

As a philosopher I welcome ecoforestry as an activity based on a kind of
philosophy of life. The word "deep" of the deep ecology movement refers
to the deepness of premises for a practice, not persons.

One attempt to class the values of forests as conceived by the
supporters of the deep ecology movement reads as follows:-

Ecoforestry Categories of Values:

1. Environmentalism: biodiversity, climate moderation, clean air and
water, wildlife, healthy soils;

2. Productive: timber, poles, medicines, chemicals, firewood, paper,
ornamentals, wood fiber;

3. Recreational: boating, camping, hunting, fishing, hiking, skiing,
canoeing, mountain climbing;

4. Aesthetic: natural beauty, painting, drawing, photography, artistic
inspiration, poetry, storytelling, natural history, craft traditions,
florist supplies;

5. Spiritual: tranquility, communication with Nature, reconnection to
our natural self, ecological wisdom from forests, connections with the
whole community of living beings, contact with the free creative power
of Nature and the inherent values of the Earth.

(International Journal of Ecoforestry, Vol.10, No.3, 1994, p.112.)

One may of course base ecologically responsible forest use on different
philosophies, not only those which accept the 8 points of the deep
ecology movement.
