197?

Cultures and Deep Ecology

Arne Naess

I

As late as 1945 textbooks and monographies on cultural anthropology were
still largely colored by the Western conception of progress. Most
cultures and peoples were said still to be rather primitive and
underdeveloped in a mildly or sharply derogative sense. They were also
said to be stagnant and ignorant. Thousands of sophisticated techniques,
such as Polynesian methods of navigation, were largely unknown to the
West. There has been a remarkable change, perhaps largely due to the
increasing feeling in industrial growth societies that these do not seem
to have learned to cope with fundamental problems of individual, social
and political life consistently better than other kinds of societies.

In the 60s, Rachel Carson through her Silent Spring and Marshall Sahlins
through his Stone Age Economics, and many others through similar
explicitly or implicitly critical works started an ecologically inspired
movement which deserves the title "deep": it questions all basic, mostly
implicit philosophical assumptions typical of industrial growth
societies (perhaps with the exception of that of Japan). As an example
of an assumption largely believed in as late as 1945 was that in
affluent societies with reasonable laws of justice crimes such as
robbery would decrease towards zero. The cultural life of a society
tended to be equated with the top achievements of artists and other
elites.

The vernacular term "culture" belongs to the most vague and ambiguous,
and even within social and cultural anthropology, there are rather
different usages. In what follows I use it in a fairly broad sense, but
excluding artefacts like paintings, cars, bombs. A system of value
priorities and basic conceptions of the universe may be said to be
implicit in a culture, and also its anti-establisment movements. The
opposition to what is dominant may take various forms, but recent
research tends to confirm the hypothesis that no culture is absolutely
monolithic. But characteristically the opposition is largely using the
basic frame of reference of the dominant trend, like sons reacting
against fathers. Anyhow, the pluralism within human cultures makes it
not feasible to point of a definite, consistent philosophy corresponding
to a culture as a whole. In what follows, where I speak about a culture,
I refer to the dominant trend of a culture with its dominat values. With
tht limitation there is an isomorphy between philosophies and cultures
which shall need to be elaborated a little further.

II

A 'philosophy', as I use the term in this article, furnishes a total
view. A total view is in part normative, announcing fundamental and
derived norms and values, in part descriptive, for instance describing
fundamental traits of human nature and of causal and non-causal
connections between humans and non-humans.

It pertains to the philosopher to connect basic principles with action.
A philosophy aspires to wisdom, not only knowledge. One cannot 'have' a
certain philosophy with out tracing its consequences in concrete life
situations and at least try either to follow its norms or change them.

A philosophy colors 'everything' and change of philosophy changes
'everything'. That is, everything as perceived and conceived. The same
can be said about a culture. But whereas there is at least in the West a
heavy pressure on philosophers to articulate the philosophy in
non-poetic and non-mythic language, this does not hold good of members
of a culture. The articulations develop only through confrontations
between members of different cultures. (To some extent this may have
been the case with philosophies.)

In what follows I shall announce a mainly normative fragment of a
philosophy, a philosophy of culture, but also engage in reflections on
the meta-level, reflections about cultures and more specifically about a
subclass of cultures I shall call 'eco-cultures'.

III

In order not to be too vague, I shall introduce a concept of
'ecocultures' tied to the deep ecology movement. Broadly speaking, I use
the term to mean cultures as envisaged by active supporters of that
movement, in what follows sometimes simply referred to as 'M'. There is
a fairly rich literature about and of this movement. It should not be
necessary here to trace its prehistory and history.[1]

The term 'ecoculture' I use in what follows for any culture that
propagates and to a high degree satisfies the norms of the deep ecology
movement.

What is the philosophy, if any, of this movement?

The philosophies represented among active supporters of M have
consequences in concrete life situations which are in sharp contrast
with dominat cultural trends, including political, social, educational
and moral valuations and practices. In the resulting confrontations the
supporters of M use different strategies: some try to convert the
adversaries through moral, or more general, ethical appeals. They hope
to change 'the mentality' through verbal communication. Others
concentrate on factual (and supposedly factual) information. The
adversary may have the same ethics, but different perceptions and
opinions concerning what is going on in the world at large and locally.
Others try through non-violent direct actions to awaken those who more
or less ignore the issues. They try in Gandhian spirit to convince the
adversaries that issue is deadly serious, and that they are willing to
sacrifice for the cause. Still others concentrate on the change of
lifestyle, hoping to convert others by good example. The groups are of
course overlapping.

The first group connects in an explicit, manifest way philosophy (and
often religion) with concrete life situations and definite political,
social and educational issues. But this does not mean that the others do
not act from the basis of a total view. In this paper I have often in
mind people who informally have communicated their strong personal
views.

The participants of the deep ecology movement have certain basic ideas
in common, but scarcely a whole philosophy. Rather different
perspectives are compatible with close cooperation in conservation
strategies and mutual aid in concrete environmental conflicts. Let me
first try to articulate some of the fairly common ideas and
corresponding attitudes:

1. The 'all things hang together' idea: without making the slogan more
precise here, ecology has revealed a fundamentally more intimate
relation between man and environment, a relation deep enough to make
some of us drop using the phrase 'mankind and its environment'. The
so-called 'social' self of human beings comprises features of non-social
environment. To the Aristotelian slogan 'man is a social/political
animal' should be added 'man is an ecospherical being'.

2. Slowly people in responsible positions have grudgingly accepted facts
of long term interdependence. But it is characteristic of those
participating in the deep ecology movement that insights into the
'hanging together' are accepted joyfully as expressions of their life
feeling. The unity is experienced as a confirmation of the factual basis
of a deep desire and expectancy, not as an unwelcome and reluctantly
acknowledge dependency upon something external and basically indifferent
to oneself and to mankind. There is no 'problem of knowledge of the
external world' - to use a phrase as Bertrand Russell - because there is
no such cleavage as is presumed between 'internal' and 'external'. Those
terms are better left out.

3. The joyful admittance of man's intimate relations to all living
beings and the ecosphere at large implies care for the richness and
diversity of life forms. Antarctic penquins should live and flourish,
whether we ever see them or not. The concern shows itself in the
formulation of the aims of the conservation strategies as proposed by M.
These relate to the earth, its life forms, not only to man's health and
living standard. The wider objective does not, however, prevent the
participants of the deeper ecological movement to advocate conservations
for the sake of humans. It is obviously in the interest of mankind to
stop decreasing diversity and richness of life forms. It is unrealistic
today to expect a major change of national and international
unecological policies except through heavy reliance on arguments
centering upon specifically human survival, health and prosperity. This
insight colors for instance the important publication World Conservation
Strategy. It is inspired by M., but wisely limits arguments to the
strictly 'homocentric'.

4. Whereas it has been largely accepted that humans should never use
others 'merely as means' (Immanuel Kant), there are in the M strong
pleas for generalizing the norm to cover a substantial subclass of all
living beings, or even, in a somewhat abstract sense, to cover all life
forms. Closely connected with this norm generalization is that it widens
the area of values in themselves. The slogan 'Let the river live!', to
mention an example, revealed the basic motive of thousands of people who
actively resisted the 'development' of a great arctic river. Many of
them made use of the river in various ways, but basically their concern
was the river itself. As a value in itself, as something that has a
right of existence independent of passing human desires of exploitation.
And something that is alive.

In a close family every mature member treats every other as an intrinsic
value. Their life and well-being is considered a value in itself. When
we inquire which are the limits of the class of beings treated as values
in themselves, it may be helpful to compare with relations within family
life or within other units to which we have access. What today is
sometimes called the crisis of family life is a mutual disappearance of
members from the set of beings treated as values in themselves. A
narrow, calculating utilitarian attitude is prevalent some places each
member more or less consciously asking which profit can be gained
(hedonistically or otherwise) through which kind of treatment of the
other members.

Different kinds of steps towards satisfaction of the generalized ideas
of value in itself correspond to different relations of humans and the
various subclasses of living beings. So far, there have been vast
differences in treatment. In some cultures pigs have tended in many ways
to be treated as members of the family - with sorrowful crisis when the
time for slaughtering approaches; in other cultures a narrow utilitarian
attitude has prevailed, in part aggravated by insensitivity to the need
of pigs to freedom of movement. In some cultures the carefully selected
life forms in gardens have been treated with consideration and personal
interest, whereas life just outside and the landscape at large have been
totally disregarded.

Supporters of M have in common a wider conception of what has value in
itself. It shows itself in argumentation: whereas others insist that a
living being must somehow show its usefulness in order to be saved from
interference, utility arguments are subordinate arguments for supporters
of M.

IV

Which kinds of culture would, broadly speaking, satisfy supporters of
the deep ecology movement? There is room for a rich variety of answers
to that question. I suggest the following. Cultures[2] with a more or
less uniformly high level of realization of M-norms[3] would be
characterized by:

1. Minimal pollution. 'Pollution' defined not only in relation to the
human species.

2. Minimal resource depletion. Use, re-use of materials. Technology
adapted to state of resources. (Long time perspective, low discount
rate. This applies to every point and will not be mentioned any more.)
Life style ideals and standards in conformity with resource policy.
Resource depletion not only defined in relation to the human species.

3. Population limited in conformity with norms implied in points 1 and
2, and not exceeding what is necessary to sustain cultures. Population
optimum not only defined in relation to humans.

4. High level of selfreliance and maximum selfreliance potential. Low
level of selfreliance increases chances of interference with other
cultures in negative direction and also decreases selfdetermination,
mastering of life situations, increases alienation. Maximum potential
maximizes the ability to cope with crises.

5. Technology adapted to the realization of the foregoing (and later)
points. This implies on the whole 'soft' technology, but high cultural
'achievements' may necessitate some 'hard' techniques. (Certain kinds of
'poverty'[4] may, for instance, only be at least provisionally
eliminated through hard techniques.)

6. Lifestyles combining maximal enjoyment and realization of intrinsic
values with minimum complication of means. This bombastic formulation
may be eliminated in favor of less rhetorical, but more complex,
graduated formulations.

7. Education with a fundamental goal of high development of sensitivity
in relation to goods of which there are enough for all, or could be
enough through actions consistent with the other points made.

8. Education fostering non-violent ways of conflict resolution. By
'conflict' I refer to narrow concept of 'confrontation leading to
over-all reduction of life potentialities'. (Some conflicts in a wider
sense increases potentialities.)

9. Competence-distribution and completeness of participation. Ecology
has brough to our attention that the interconnection, that is, the
connection between relations and relata, within the whole existence is
more intimate thane ver conceived, except in some philosophies. But
ecology has also brought to our attention the elan vitale (Henry Bergson
a.o.) of the individuals, communities, cultures (animal and human) and
species. It has shown us how these units within the whole profit from,
make use of, and enjoy the interconnections. They find a place to grow,
a niche, a life space, maximally fit to preserve and enhance their
essence and further development. Applied to humans we talk about
self-realization (self-fulfillment) and self-determination. To a certain
extent we use the same terms in relation to larger units, families,
communities, the whole human 'race'.

The maximum self-determination given the intimate relations to others
is, among other factors, dependent upon mastering the various functions
of a culture. In our big industrial societies, specialization has been
pressed to such a vast point, that the fraction i/c between what an
individual masters and the sum total of cultural functions tends towards
zero.

From cultural anthropology we know of cultures where i/c is not far
from 1. But they are in our view very 'primitive'. Nevertheless, if
human individuals shall be able to retain and maintain a high degree of
self determination within a culture, mastering their life as most
animals seem to do in their 'natural environment', the culture must be
such as to increase i/c as much as is possible without heavy disturbance
of other factors. For the majority of people, it means an increase in
comparison to the status today.

V

The above points obviously need clarification and elaboration. Here I
can only touch upon a small number of issues.

1) In general the points may sound utopian or extremist; but this may
largely be due to the chosen form of exposition. The essentially same
points may also, and have also, been formulated in terms of successive
steps to be taken in the direction of higher levels of satisfaction of
the M-norms. Thus formulated the points may sound too moderate or even
defeatist: the first steps are of very modest kind, but not
opportunistic. They do not exclude or hinder further steps of
increasingly significant kinds.

2) Not all forms of utilitarianism are incompatible with the main ideas
of M. One may say that the mature, harmoniously developed human being
has a need to live among beings which have values in themselves and not
only useful for him or her. These beings are useful, namely, to satisfy
the above need. The believer in values in themselves does not agree,
however, that without that need, such values disappear.

3) Not a word has been said, so far, about the role of religion.
Considering the central role of religious ideas in most cultures this
may seem strange.

To an increasing extent people to whom religion is a major source of
inspiration and guidance have actively supported M. Roughly, the
specifically religious norms and hypotheses make up a metaphysical
background from which the religious minded derive philosophical norms
and hypotheses. Through this process they enter the framework of this
article - the philosophy of M.

Until now special trends in Christianity, Buddhism, Hinduism and Taoism
have furnished interpretations compatible or even markedly favorable to
M.

The affinity between religiosity and M seems to consist mainly in the
common willingness to say categorically NO to certain phenomena and to
take seriously norms which it is obviously utopian to follow rigorously
and consistently. ("We are all sinners, but...").

Concluding, I wish to acknowledge that religion may have an important
function in some kinds of ecoculture.

4) Role of science. Critique of natural science, especially the 'hard'
sciences is widespread among academic supporters of M. Some insist that
'quantification' and 'objectivity' are major sources of the ills of our
industrial cultures. Others lament the influence of Cartesian, Baconian
and Newtonian scientific ideals upon all human efforts to understand
reality and the human predicament.

In global perspective, studying non-Western science, especially
classical Chinese and Indian, 'science' tends to acquire a very wide
connotation. The same holds good if we form concepts of science with the
wide framework of Thomas, Spinoza or Whitehead. I do not see any reason
why M should be particularly critical about science in general. But
critique is of course appropriate in considering the scientific
enterprise as adapted to specific traits of industrial growth societies
and their technologies.

Of the many interesting problems relating to science and culture I may
mention the following: to what extent is modern cosmology and high
energy experiments (with mile-long machinery) absorbable in an
ecoculture? Being myself an eager 'consumer' of such modern 'hard and
big' science I wish to advocate the possibility of absorption in some
ecocultures, even if the priority of such developments must be lower
than in the richest societies today. The possibility is dependent on
tough-science ecocultures scoring very high on other scales than that of
energy consumption and so-called advanced technology. The possibility is
perhaps rather remote?

5) Ultimate goals. The ultimate goals of human life advocated in
philosophies may be roughly classed in three classes, the hedonist, the
eudaimonist and the perfectionist. Key terms: lust (pleasure), happiness
(the good life), realizing norms (duties, altruism, humanism,
authenticity (Heidegger), creativity, power).

Many supporters of M have said things which make them belong to the
perfectionist category. Others belong there as far as can be judged from
their lifestyle. But there is no norm or hypothesis of M which precludes
having other kinds of ultimate goals - or of rejecting having any or
rejecting even the meaningfulness of the term 'ultmate goal'.
Nevertheless, I cannot see how any variety of hedonism could fit in.
Elaboration of this point requires, among other things, a clarification
of terminology which might lead us too far away from the essentials.

6) Focus on global strategy and local community: ecoculture ideals have
in common an expansion of middle dimension organizations towards the
global, and the expansion of the smallest organizations towards the
community dimension. More concretely: such units as districts, regions,
states, lose in priority of function relative to the global perspective,
the worldwide organizations. The parent-children family is expanded
towards the 'greater family' and the local community.

The panjayat-concept of Gandhi and related conceptions are relevant.

The problems have received little attention as how to create and
maintain central, global institutions. The need for a kind of
coordination or even government with global responsibility is obvious,
but rather distasteful for most supporters of M. The need is
proportional to the richness and plurality of deeply different
ecocultures. Even if a global state of affairs were realized in the
sense of M, how long time could it be sustained? The tendency to expand
and dominate would characterize at least some of the cultures - even if
they would score very highly on some M-variables. Unfortunately, central
authorities of some kinds seem unfavorable if destructive tendences are
to be counteracted.

An additional problem: to what culture would the servants of the global
institutions belong? We have in places like Geneva some experience of
how a vast concentration of international institutions influences their
members and their communities. If the trend towards middle-scale unit
elimination were forceful, how would the global 'servants' react? Could
there be a superculture? Experience seems to deny that possibility -
even conceptually.

VI

Comparing European and American trends within the deep ecology movement,
there has been in Europe more work done in human ecology and "political
ecology" ('eco-politics'). Perhaps also more stress on cultural
diversity as a consequences of deep norms of life diversity and future
development of mankind.

When Norway decided not to join the European Common Market in 1972, the
arguments as formulated in the central publications against joining,
were largely those of the deep ecology movement. There was no enthusiasm
for 'Europe speaking with one voice', for 'higher worker mobility', that
is, higher tendency to shift from home and friends and local community
to get more 'attractive' jobs, let us say, in Germany. The ideal regions
of Norway were identified with those where 'everything' was within easy
bicycling distance. (Woods, lakes, pastures, jobs in small industry,
institutions of higher education.) The relevance of human and non-human
ecology was made clear. I mention this as an example of European trends
within what now is known as 'green' economics, politics and philosophy.

Some questions concerning cultural diversity, eagerly debated in Europe,
should perhaps be mentioned before concluding.

There is a widespread opinion among cultural anthropologists that deep
cultural differences will cease to exist on this planet if present
trends continue. The death or crippling of non-industrial cultures
proceeds with increasing speed in spite ofincreasing awareness of the
situation and in spite of increasing efforts to change the trend. The
dominance of industrial technology, military equipment, trade, and the
Western ways of entertainment seem to many researchers to be
incompatible with deep cultural differences. This conclusion I
accept.[5]

There is in the West a consensus that in the future there should be no
poor cultures in the material sense. If there is an either-or question,
either poverty or destruction of the specific traits of a culture, then
the specific traits must go. I do not find strong objections against
these formulations. But then the term "poverty" must be clarified. What
was "rich" yesterday is "poor" today.

Let us consider medicine. Should such operations be available to the
average person which now only rich people can afford, but which cost 50
times the yearly income of an average family? Should mining be made
postively healthy for miners? Should every culture have access to
material means required to stop an aggressor? The longer time the
material level of aspiration increases, given the sort of technology and
economic system that is accepted now in the leading industrial
countries, the less likely it is that we can avoid development into one
single culture on earth. Deep cultural diversity in the future depends
upon acceptance of a life rich in the realization of intrinsic values,
but simple in means. The development now is towards poorness, but simple
of intrinsic values combined with complicated ineffective means.

In face of the development from culture to subculture (within greater
units of civilization), one may ask whether the subcultures and rich
flora of differences in lifestyle within industrial societies could not,
in some cases, develop into genuine cultures.

The subcultures within Western industrial nations are heavily colored by
their continuous fight against 'the establishment'. They are not masters
within any territory comparable in extent to genuine cultures. They have
so far had no ecological niches, little capacity of material
self-reliance, except within limited neighborhoods. Still more
important, the network of laws and regulations operation in the
centralized industrial states makes it impossible, so far, for
subcultures to create an environment of cultural specificity. The
schoolboy, to take an example, is forced upon the minorities through
many formative years. Without specific acculturation in childhood, the
life and growth of a culture seems to be impossible.

Individual differences in lifestyles within a common framework are
increasingly accepted in some industrial states. Whether this tolerance
may be extended, and territories left largely untouched by the machinery
of industrial states (as we know them today), is an open question.
Experience so far indicates that the difficulties are very considerable.
The history of the "free" territory called Christiania (in the middle of
Copenhagen) furnishes an example. There is need for comparing experience
in different parts of the world where small communities have tried to
establish deep lasting cultural differences from the dominant trends.

VII

Subjects such as pollution, resource depletion (including
desertification, degradation of soils, ...), and population explosion
are discussed mainly through a large number of natural science journals.
The cultural implications are not widely discussed.

The social sciences are now firmly established in the West, but between
a social and an ecospherical perspective there is a considerable
difference. There is also a difference between the perspective of
wisdom, as distinguished from, but dependent upon, knowledge, and the
perspective of any science. The wide normative questions of cultures as
wholes require that we admit the relevance of wisdom. If this is
admitted, scientists now engaged in ecological and related issues will
tend to concentrate on subjects most relevant to wise decisions
concerning future cultural development, bringing together the local and
global focus.

[1] George Sessions provides an excellent survey of literature in
English in his "Shallow and Deep Ecology: A Review of the Philosophical
Literature", Ecological Consciousness: Essays from the Earthday X
Colloquium, University of Denver, April, 21-24, 1980, ed. R.C.Schultz
and J.D.Hughes, University Press of America, 1981, pp.391-462.

[2] More precisly: individual cultures. About groups of cultures, total
culture pattern of the planet, and cultural minorities - see later.

[3] It is tempting to introduce the term 'ecocultures' as shorthand for
'cultures establishing a high degree of satisfaction of the norms of M.'

[4] In the past outstanding achievements, such as cave paintings, have
been created by people who were 'poor' by most standards.

[5] The concept of 'deepness' of cultural differences I discuss at
length in 'Which World is the Real One?' (Hvilken verden er den
virkelige?), 2nd ed., Oslo University Press, 1982.
