The Basics of Deep Ecology[1]

Arne Naess

I am very grateful to be here. Some weeks ago when I thought of this
occasion I had two feelings. The first was that I was going to visit the
British aristocracy! In school we learned a lot about British
aristocracy, and mostly it was positive. We got the notion that they
were the best. By aristocracy I mean those who are in the forefront, the
most enlightened and far-seeing members of society. I have a feeling
that I am going to taste this British aristocracy today!

The second feeling was that I had come from one occupied country to
another occupied country. The people of Norway were occupied from 1940
to 1945 by very unkind people. Now I feel that we are occupied by kind
and well-meaning people. They do things for our welfare but in reality
we feel completely estranged from the essence of the good life. I am
sure that the same is true in Britain today. Only, I am glad to say, you
were not occupied by bad people.

Those who occupy my country talk about the useless hills. Only a couple
of days ago they referred to the useless hills in the neighbourhood of
Oslo which, they thought, should be developed as a site for mansions.
People who already have very nice houses could then go up to the hills
and have still nicer houses by cutting down all the trees. So we are
very far from a green and free society.

The realisation of any society worthy of the name green presupposes that
policies characteristic of deep ecology are adopted. The clarification
of the term deep ecology will, I hope, contribute in a modest way to the
realisation of our aims. I am engaged in the articulation of the
fundamental positions that are pre-supposed in green societies.

People ask, ‘Why can’t we just feel and not articulate?’ My answer to
this is, ‘In our society there is constant communication, and we must be
able to communicate on a verbal plane. If we are able to articulate our
basic goals in life and get our opponents to agree to them then we can
go on to discuss practical matters such as, “We must have more parking
space.” When we agree on basic goals we can ask “All right, what’s the
relation between our basic goals in life and this parking place?” So,
the articulation of our basic goals has an important role. We should
never engage in any discussion on technicalities without asking, “What
do we basically need in life?” Always ask the basic question. This is
what I mean by the term Deep Ecology Movement, or typical of supporters
of it.

Let me then list some key sentences commonly held to be characteristic
of a green society. It should be decentralised, and should be a
grassroots democracy. There should be social responsibility, mutual aid
and a reign of non-violence. People should live in voluntary simplicity,
with a high degree of self-reliance and with moderate mobility.
Different generations should be able to live together and work together.
There should be a feeling of community, technology should be
appropriate, industrial and agricultural units should be small. Home and
place of work should be near each other and transportation mainly
public. There should be an absence of social hierarchy and an absence of
male domination.

You will have noticed that all these concepts lack any kind of reference
to nature or to ecology but they are, of course, basic to a vision of a
green society.

Then there are concepts of another type; namely respect for nature,
reverence for life, ecological agriculture, absence of monoculture
forests, absence of animal factories, free access to nature and so on.

And then there is a third aspect of the deep ecology approach. This is
characterised by our deep relationship with the environment and a joyful
acceptance of this relationship. It is taken for granted that the self
is basically ecological. Talk about human beings in the environment is
misleading, for we are as much out there as inside here. The beauty of a
tree is as much in the tree as it is inside us. There is an object, a
medium and a subject, but you cannot separate these three except as
abstractions. People with this approach think in these terms: world
first, men not apart, friends of the earth, ecological responsibility,
the forest for the trees, hug the trees. If we say ‘the forest for the
trees’ we acknowledge that a forest is an end in itself, it does not
need to serve any narrow human purpose.

The terms I have mentioned fall into three classes – those solely
concerned with human society, those which combine society with nature
and those solely concerned with nature. Some groups working for the
realisation of a green society prefer the first class of slogans while
others use the second or the third class.

There is an interesting difference between thinking green in Central and
Mediterranean Europe and thinking green in the marginal lands of north
and south. By marginal northern and southern lands I mean Scandinavia,
Great Britain, Canada, north west United States and Australia. I call
them the ‘natural greens’. And then there are the ‘social greens’ in
Germany, France, the Mediterranean and many other places where more
stress is put upon society. The ‘social greens’ say that a wrong
attitude to nature reflects a wrong attitude between people. Domination,
exploitation and lack of respect within a society result in the same
attitude to nature. They assume that if you get rid of these bad
attitudes within society then, more or less automatically, your relation
to nature will be OK. What you have to do is reform society. You have to
get involved in politics. Don’t disappear into the wilderness and live
in a nice community as if this could be the norm of the whole society.

The ‘natural greens’ say: ‘What’s so exciting about people when you
consider porcupines or whales? We have to reduce the human population
and have a nice planet.’ That’s a caricature of them, but there’s a
tendency to speak as if people were superfluous.

The supporters of the Deep Ecology Movement combine the ‘social greens’
with the ‘natural greens’, avoiding the extremes of both.

Some people have a concept of a green society which is Utopian. They put
into the term ‘green society’ everything that is perfect. Others point
out that Green Party programmes cannot just be descriptions of Utopia.
They must serve as blueprints for a major transition towards a green
society. Fundamentalists say exactly how things should be while realists
stress that in politics you have to use tactical considerations; a Green
Party cannot act in a Utopian way.

In discussions between fundamentalists and realists we should adopt the
Gandhian form of non-violence. In this you see the point of your
opponent, you listen to the argument, interpreting benevolently, as far
as you can. The Latin phrase is Stupiditas adversariorum non est praeter
necessitatem argumenendam. That means you shouldn’t make your opponent
look unnecessarily stupid. During the 1960s we had a lot of different
groups on the Left. There was richness and variety but they were
fighting each other. Then came the ecology movement and from the very
start there was a difference. There was much less of violent polemics.
If your communication is consistently positive, you will get down deeper
into the issues. If you say, ‘Wrong. You are absolutely wrong’, your
opponent will stick to their argument and say, ‘No, I was not wrong.’
But if you say, ‘Maybe you could put it a little differently’, then you
may be able to get agreement, and if you really disagree, you will be
able to clarify it.

The supporters of the Deep Ecology Movement are all over the world. A
small minority are from the universities, a tiny fraction are writing
about these matters, but our real strength is with those who don’t give
lectures, but who are supporting the Deep Ecology Movement in their
lives. This movement started in the early 1960s with people like Rachel
Carson. They were not only speaking of cancer or of polluted air because
it was bad for humanity. They said, ‘It cannot be done to the planet, it
cannot be done to nature, it cannot be done to the animals. It simply
cannot be done.’ These pioneers had a vision of reality which does not
allow us to trample on natural life. Theirs was not a moral impulse. And
I have the feeling that moralising is not a great force in this world.
So the ethics and the morals of environmentalism are of secondary
importance. What is important is to get people to see reality and our
relation to nature.

I introduced the distinction between ‘shallow’ ecology and ‘deep’
ecology. The supporters of shallow ecology think that reforming human
relations towards nature can be done within the existing structure of
society. They propose to make small changes here and there within the
institutions; they suggest technical development to reduce pollution.
They don’t get down to the basics because they think that business can
continue as usual. They will give a little more money to the Department
of the Environment and to research. But research only postpones the
problem. There’s a politician here in Great Britain who says that we
must have more research on the causes of acid rain. But the better the
researcher you are, the more you say, ‘Oh, we don’t know enough, we must
have more money.’ Research is now on the wrong side. They get one year
to come up with some answers but at the end of the year they say, ‘Well,
we’re just starting, it seems to be very complicated. We need more time
and money.’ That’s how endless research goes on.

The Deep Ecology Movement will say that we can never know enough: docta
ignorantia – ‘conscious ignorance’. The best field ecologists use their
intuition about reality, they can, of course, find out a little here and
there but they cannot always know the long range effects of human
interference. They understand the enormous complexity of the planet and
of ourselves. So from this docta ignorantia, we get the idea that it is
better not to do anything where there are great risks involved. But the
politician is here to do things. So either you say any action which may
damage the planet is wrong and we cannot do it, or you say we cannot
know whether it is wrong or right and therefore we must not do it.

The tendency of the supporters of the shallow ecology is to avoid the
basic questions, whereas the Deep Ecology Movement concerns itself with
basic beliefs and assumptions about the universe. If you articulate the
principles of the Deep Ecology Movement you get a total view. The term
‘total view’ is essential. The Deep Ecology Movement is a total view. It
covers our basic assumptions, our life philosophy and our decisions in
everyday life. I have also called the total view an ‘ecosophy’ in order
to distinguish it from ecology as a science. Sophia is Greek for wisdom.
So, ecosophy means eco-wisdom, and wisdom has always been related to
practice.

When we in the Deep Ecology Movement talk about pollution, we ask,
‘Pollution for whom? There are so many living beings. Are you talking
about pollution for humans? What about pollution for others?’ And when
we talk about resources we ask, ‘What about resources for squirrels as
well as resources for human beings?’ When we talk about pollution, we
must also consider the optimum population of rats. I think we have to
avoid feeding rats as much as we do. We always go from discussing the
sphere of human life, which is important for us, to life in general. And
we would say that any short-range solution should cover at least the
next fifty years. In deep ecology, fifty years is very short. In
contrast to this is the short hand solution – that is next year, next
election.

In the Deep Ecology Movement we are biocentric or ecocentric. For us it
is the ecosphere, the whole planet, Gaia, that is the basic unit, and
every living being has an intrinsic value.

The supporters of the Deep Ecology Movement agree upon this, but in
their very basic views about the universe and themselves they may well
disagree. They may have, for instance, a Buddhist inspired philosophy,
or a Christian inspired philosophy or a non-religious approach. At this
most basic level we cannot understand each other. We cannot understand
five or ten different religions. We shouldn’t pretend to. It is
culturally disastrous to pretend that we can understand all religions or
all philosophies. That is a terrible error on the part of the
universities – there are courses in all philosophies and all religions
of the world where they are supposed to understand philosophers who are
miles apart. I feel it is important in Deep Ecology Movement to have
plurality, especially at this deepest level. But from all religions and
philophical approaches we agree on the following points. (Comments are
in parentheses).

1. The well-being and flourishing of human and non-human life on earth
have intrinsic value, inherent worth. This value is independent of the
usefulness of the non-human world for narrow human purposes.

2. Richness and diversity of life forms contribute to a realisation of
these values and are also values in themselves. (Richness means we have
to have an abundance of life of all kinds. We have to replenish the
earth. In this sense, landscapes are living beings and so are rivers. I
can’t and I don’t have to justify that diversity and richness; plurality
of life is good in itself. People who claim to be realistic say, ‘Well,
I keep to facts.’ But what is the status of this sentence, ‘So-and-so is
a fact?’ In logic you need rules and the goodness of those rules cannot
be shown – they cannot be argued, they cannot come as a conclusion. If
you say, ‘This rule of logic is valid’, then I say, ‘Well, show me that,
prove it.’ You have to use premises to arrive at a conclusion and in
order to do that, you have to have rules of inference from which you
come from the premise to the conclusion. You cannot start by saying, ‘I
am for facts’ because the term ‘fact’ itself is a tremendously complex
affair. Aristotle said that to try to prove everything is a sign of bad
education. Diversity of life for us is such a premise that we don’t need
to waste time in proving it.)

3. Humans have no right to reduce this richness and diversity except to
satisfy vital needs. (People say to me, ‘Oh, but what do you mean by
right?’ I say, ‘I mean exactly the same as when children say “You have
no right to hit my little sister”’ – and this is established practice
amongst children so there must be something in it.)

4. The flourishing of human life and culture is compatible with a
substantial decrease of the human population. Flourishing of non-human
life requires such a decrease. (Here some people would say, ‘This is
anti-human.’ But I believe that it is not even good for humans that we
are five thousand million and soon going to be eight thousand million.
It’s not even good for the deep cultural differences on earth; it’s very
difficult to have cultural differences with no space in between. This
significant decrease in human population is not going to take place
suddenly. It may take a thousand years. This is our long-range vision.
People say, ‘A thousand years has nothing to do with the problem of
today.’ Yes, it does have to do with today. For example, we have to
change our architecture. Old people need small children around because
small children are, after all, important. So the architecture will have
to be such that you have a common ground, without streets, where small
children and old people can get together. If you have two children per
couple on an average, then there will be a transition period of hundreds
of years and eventually you will have a smaller population.)

5. Present human interference with the non-human world is excessive and
the situation is rapidly worsening.

6. Policies must therefore be changed. These policies will affect our
basic economic, technological and ideological structures. (I have not
had the courage to go into detail and define what these different
structures will be because we are going to have a lot of different green
societies. We shouldn’t have one set of structures imposed.)

7. The change in our attitudes will bring an appreciation of the quality
of life rather than adhering to an increasingly higher standard of
living. There will be a profound awareness of the difference between big
and great. (We will have a grea society with no bigness. I am very much
in love with the term ‘qulaity of life’. People say, ‘Well, that’s just
a slogan. Standard of living is quantitative, that we can discuss and
understand, but the quality of life, what’s that?’ I am very much for
the richness and luxury that I have in my cottage in the high mountains
of Norway. For more than ten years of living there, the feeling of
richness has been tremendous. But this is quality of life, not standard
of living. If there is snow in the winter, I dig down into a lake for
water. In order to heat that water from minus 1° to plus 1° takes as
many calories as to heat it from plus 1° to 100°. So I use cold water
for washing. But after one or two months of living there I feel very
comfortable.)

In Great Britain and in Norway we have to accept a drop in our standard
of living in order to have a standard which is universalisable. What I
am saying is, ‘Take it easy, take it easy, life quality may still be
there but you will have to shed some of your bad habits which destroy
the planet.’ Much of the high standard of living is sheer bad habits
which we cannot sustain because they are ruining the balance of Gaia.

8. Those who subscribe to the foregoing points have an obligation
directly or indirectly to try to implement necessary changes.

[1] Published in Green Fuse, London: Quartet Books, 1990
