Spinoza and the Deep Ecology Movement

Arne Naess

I

Which philosophers of the past deserve to be called great? This question
leads to a second: Who are competent to judge? I belong to those who do
not feel competent, but let me use two indicators of greatness.

One indicator is that of being rediscovered and highly appreciated by
successive generations of philosophers. Another indicator is the
persistent richness and diversity of interpretations of their texts.
Spinoza scores brilliantly in both ways. His texts are constantly
reinterpreted by philosophers, poets, scientists and others. Among the
last century's well-known interpretations we may mention Goethe and
Hegel. Among the many distinguished interpreters in this century I do
not feel competent to pick out anybody in particular.

Again and again philosophers and others are inspired by Spinoza even if
they do not carry out any research. They are life-long Spinoza 'fans',
using a modern terminology.

In what follows I speak as a life philosopher, not as a historian. Study
of the life and time of Spinoza is essential for any close study of the
textual material, but for my purpose it can only be a necessary
instrument. Also strict systematization of Spinoza's views in the Ethics
can only be an instrument, a methodological technique, but my background
is such that I find it naturual to work systematically.

One of the most inspiring aspects of the text Ethica ordine geometico
demonstrata is this: it outlines a total view. It outlines the ultimate
premisses in our thinking about ourselves and the greater reality we are
part of. There are other great thinkers who try to do the same.
Aristotle, Thomas Aquinas, Thomas Hobbes, among others.

The term 'premiss' is important. The relation of premisses to
conclusion, in order to be valid, must be logical at least in one of the
wide senses of that very ambiguous word. For reasons and by motivations
historians do not quite agree about, Spinoza chose an exposition of his
system with great stress on the relation premiss/conclusion - analogous
to Euclid's exposition of geometry.

In the Elements of Euclid the important and interesting theorems occur
far from the axioms and definitions. These can be modified - like
ultimate premisses in systems of formal logic. The same applies to the
exposition of the Ethics . When there seems to be inconsistencies
between a sentence in part x and one in part y, a modification of the
interpretation of the sentence in x is as relevant as that of the
sentence in y even if x has formal logical priority over y. That is,
even if x may be part of the system of premisses from which y is
derived. In what follows this way of looking at formal priority and
relevance is often made use of. We must not succumb to any irrational
reverance for the formal priority.

The deterioration of life conditions on Earth has motivated many people
to take up the philosophical or religious basis for their action in
favor of the preservation of the richness and diversity of life on
Earth. Religious leaders mobilize in defense of God's creation. Academic
philosophers are increasingly reflecting the crisis in their writings.
The sources of philosophic inspiration are many: the works of Aristotle,
Spinoza, Hegel, Heidegger, Whitehead,... . Personally I have since I was
17 years old had a special relation to Spinoza's Ethics, but I do not
believe that this work is one that can help ecologically conscious
people to articulate their basic attitudes. I believe there is need for
deeply different articulations, including the poetic.

There are several terms in the Ethics which to my mind are
extraondinarily helpful when we try to express the fundamental views
which have motivated our 'environmental activism'.

I shall in the next 4 sections concentrate on one of those terms, namely
amor intellectualis Dei.

II

a The term amor intellectualis Dei and closely related terms, had for
centuries been important theological terms within the rich tradition
Spinoza modified in his own particular direction.

Among the wise historians who have studied Spinoza I wish to point to
Harry Austryn Wolfson. His account of the spiritual genesis of the
famous fifth part of the Ethics, on the power of the intellect or on the
human freedom, is so far unsurpassed, as far as I know. He mentions many
authors studied by Spinoza and presumably influencing him. Among others
Thomas Aquinas and Leo Hebraeus. Wolfson says:

A model classification of live in which intellectual love is included is
given by Thomas Aquinas. He distinguishes between (a) natural love (amor
naturalis) which exists even in inanimate objects, (b) sensitive or
animal love (amor sensitivus animalis), and (c) intellectual, rational,
or spiritual love (amor intellectualis, rationalis, spiritualis).It is
this classification of Thomas Aquinas which seems to be the origin of
Leo Hebraeus' three-fold classification to love into natural, sensitive,
and rational and voluntary (naturale, sensitivo, et rationale
volontario). The last kind of love is also called by him mental love
(l'amore mentale), or, as in Thomas Aquinas, intellectual love (l'amore
intellettivo, intellettuale). (Wolfson, The Philosophy of Spinoza ,
NY:Meridian Books, 1958, II, pp.303-304.)

III

Love of God being the highest goal in the religious life of man,
Spinoza - carefully following the old tradition - furnishes this love
with an appropriate

place through his proposition 32 and 6 more propositions in his supreme,
concluding sections of the Ethics .

But does the socalled 'rationalist' system invented by Spinoza allow him
to

put so much 'theology' into it? His intention seems to have been both to
stick

firmly to reason, and furnish his contemporaries with a strong faith as
satisfactory, or more satisfactory, than theirs. This was a project that
was unlikely to succeed as far as I can see. The result: a use of the
term Deus that admits various interpretations.[1] Among basic kinds of
sentences of what we are entitled to call Spinozistic systems we find
expressions such as 'x is in itself', 'x is conceived through itself',
'x causes y, partially or totally', 'x acts according to the laws of x's
nature', 'x is freer than y', 'x is more perfect than y'. There is no
place, so far as I can see, for a God that has completely different
properties from those of the 'in itself'-family.

The Ethics is full of occurrences of the term Deus. How is it that
Spinoza was conceived as a diabolically clever atheist?

God is said to be maximally perfect (perfectissimus, summe perfectus).
God is the cause of everything, even himself. Nothing at all can be
conceived except through God. This should be enough to calm the
theologians. But they were not led astray by Spinoza's terminology. They
knew, for instance, that Spinoza was using the adjective 'perfect'
(perfectus) in an old way where it basically means 'complete'. (From
per - and FAC -. See Ethics, Preface,Part IV.) Wolfson mentions "the
original use of the term "perfection" in the sense of "completeness" and
of not lacking anything required by one's own nature..." Wolfson II,
p.222-23). The nature or essence or power of the God of Spinoza is
complete to the highest possible degree - by sheer definition. But
Spinoza does not say He is good!

'Perfection' is not a term which is introduced in the Ethics by means of
a separate definition. When not applied to Nature it admits of degrees.
Joy is an emotion through which mind is said to become more 'perfect'
(Part Three, Scholium to Proposition 11). More whole through activeness
and power. Whatever its connotation, 'more perfect' cannot be separated
in denotation from 'more powerful'. Compare proof of Proposition 61:
"Joy ... is the emotion through which the power of the body to act,
increases or is furthered." The relation to activeness, and
understanding is not only intimate. It is internal. The more perfect,
the more active and the less passive (Part Five Proposition 40). In
short, 'more perfect than' cannot, in denotation, be separated from a
number of other basic relations. The application of the term to Nature
or God clearly is on par with the application to God of terms like
'love', (amor), 'intellect', 'mind' that is, it cannot be taken in any
precise sense known from phenomena in nature as natura naturata .

There is nothing 'outside' Spinoza's God, therefore God is completely
'inside', completely immanent in the totality of what exists. And
therefore, I infer, God can only be an aspect of what there is, the
creative aspect, natura naturans , the creating aspect of nature, not
the aspect of having been

created. This interpretation is an interpretation within the family of
'theories of the immanence of God'.

Immanence of God was, of course, unacceptable to contemporary
theologians. The term 'atheist' referred to the denial of the God of
Christianity, not of any kind of God, and Spinoza was therefore
correctly

classed in their terminology as an atheist, and a diabolical one in so
far as his constant eulogy of God masked his basic aberrations.

In trying to understand the famous phrase 'intellectual love of God' it
is crucial to remember the immanent character of this Spinozist God.
Otherwise Spinoza in the culminating last part of the Ethics seems to
turn his back on the creation, on nature. He seems instead to advocate
turning our attention to something apart from everything concrete we
meet in our life. But he intends to talk about life!

IV

When I contemplate the life of Spinoza I have a suspicion that he never
completely gave up his Jewish faith, the transcendent God he loved in
his youth. As a result he may not have managed to develop a system in
which God consistently occurs as immanent in the particular beings we
meet in our daily experience. From God's essence follows his existence,
but only the 'existence' as essence. This is implied by his system, but
sometimes Spinoza seems to feel he needs more of a God than mere
essence. The God of religion, in short, appears from time to time in his
texts and threatens the consistency of his philosophical thinking and
articulation - especially in the last part of the Ethics.

Concentrating on the text, not on his infinitely complex personality, it
is possible to construct interpretations that are not inconsistent with
the wording of part 5, and by which its God remains firmly immanent.

It is in accordance with the immanence theory that "every idea of
everybody or particular (individual, singular) thing (res singularis)
actually existing necessarily involves the infinite power of God
distributed unequally among natural beings, humans being the most
powerful.

The textual basis of the theory of immanence starts with 1P25Cor and
1P36. According to 1P36 nothing exists from whose nature some effect
does not follow. That is, everything is at least a partial cause. The
proof of 1P36 relates every single thing to God:

"Whatever exists expresses in a definite and determined way (1P25Cor)
God's essence or nature, that is (1P34), whatever exists expresses in a
definite and determined way the power of God,..."

The Ethics furnishes no basis for assuming that the immanent God

expresses its nature, essence, or power, in any other way than through
each

existent being.[2] Therefore amor intellectualis Dei must somehow be a
love of these existent particular beings of our everyday life - parts of
the total richness and diversity of life forms on Earth. I say 'somehow'
because the love cannot be any kind of love, it must be of a special
kind.

V

Acting with part of the power of the immanent God, and knowing their own
action, humans necessarily know God adequately. "The human mind has an
adequate knowledge (cognitio) of the eternal and infinite essence of
God". (2P47). Since the only things to be known as actual existing
beings are the finite particular things, "the more we understand
(intelleigimus) individual things, the more we understand God". (5P24)

It is to be noticed that in 5P24 Spinoza uses the mixed
cognitive/conative terminology of cognition. For Spinoza this point is
important because in occasionally non-immanent theology body and mind
are separable existing entities, mind having a kind of immortality that
the body does not have. He is able to say to his contemporaries "Don't
think that you have to give up belief in immortality if you walk my
path!"

From the point of view of immanence, understanding at its highest "third
level" does not only have a cognitive aspect but is more specifically a
manifestation of love. It is a special kind of intuitive understanding
of a particular thing which involves an internal love relation.

In his eagerness to convince his contemporaries that his purely rational
philosophy furnishes all the satisfaction of Jewish and Christian
faiths, Spinoza perhaps stretches traditional terminology too far. The
reader easily gets the impression that a life centered around the love
of God must be a life of unworldly contemplation, a life different from
one centering around the loving understanding of particular things, say,
like the life of Rachel Carson.

This impression of Spinoza himself and of his teaching is scarcely
adequate. One need not of course be interested in, like Rachel Carson,
every living being along the shore-line, one may concentrate on humans,
like Gandhi, but the essential point is that the third kind of knowledge
concerns particular beings, and that every one of them in an egalitarian
way is an expression of the immanent God, part of natura naturans,
Nature with capital N.

One may say that the understanding love of God, and the third
(intuitive)

way of cognition, concentrates on the content of reality, not its
abstract

structure.[3] The abstract structure is investigated through the second
way of cognition. Einstein and others obviously delighted in God's
thoughts in the

form of abstract, but beautiful, laws of nature. Mathematicians delight
in still more abstract structures. Spinoza, presumably, contemplated the
(mostly unknown) manifold of attributes of substance. In all this reason
operates, but it is a form of reason that leads us ultimately to the
third kind of cognition (5P28): The third way is rational in the sense
that reason and reason alone leads us to the third way.

Love of the immanent God is love of God's expressions. If a being
expresses God's nature or essense, love of God cannot be different from
love of such a being. But what is God's nature or essence? Proposition
34 in Part 1 answers: "God's power is God's essence itself." In the
proof Spinoza says that through God's power God and every being exist
and act more or less freely. Because God is not apart from God's
expressions, causality from God to God's expressions is immanent, not
the causality of our natural science. When a human loves God
'intellectually', it cannot be but a love of one expression directed
towards another expression as an expression of God and as such of
intrinsic or inherent value.

Concepts of 'x understands lovingly y' go back at least to Aristotle who
taught that the exercise of the capacity of seeing, and sensing in
general, and of knowing, is accompanied with pleasure.[4] What may be
viewed as a novelty in the tradition of Spinoza is that there is not an
external relation of accompaniment, but an internal relation between
cognitive and conative aspect.[5] This leads away from the
'intellectualism' of Aristotle who in the terminology of Spinoza was a
master of the second way of cognition. Spinoza combines, in a way,
intellectualism and emotionalism, avoiding the extremes.

In the light of the above argumentation the intellectualis amor Dei may
be interpreted as 'loving understanding of particular beings', amor
intellectualis rerum particularium, the understanding of particular
beings the intuitive third way.There is no basis in the Ethics for the
assumption that Spinoza

refers to a subclass of beings only - the humans. But there is basis for
assuming that the particular beings are understood in the light of a
great

whole, the creative aspect of the whole. The wholism implied all through
the Ethics is secured in his use of the term God, and by the generality
of its theorems, not only through assertions like 'there exist only the
substance and its modes'. In his work On the Improvement of the
Understanding he says that he strives to attain a stable state
characterized by the knowledge of the union existing between the mind
the the whole of Nature. He adds: "... and to endeavor that many should
attain to it with me." He envisages a society conducive "to the
attainment of this character (state) by the greatest number with the
least difficulty and danger." In a sense a movement towards 'green
communities'? At least not imcompatible with such a movement. But back
to God and to the question to the 'availability' today of Spinoza's
thinking.

The immanence of God is satisfied because natura naturans and natura
naturata are not conceived as separate entities but as two aspects of
one entity of, "all (omnia) that exist", the supreme whole.

Some would ask: but is the foregoing the most plausible interpretation
of the text of the Ethics? Answer: there cannot be any most plausible
interpretation of the text of a great philosopher like Spinoza. My job
amounts to a reconstruction of part of the system rather than to find
out exactly what Spinoza in a certain period of his life intended to
mean by his words and

sentences in that period.The development and structure of the text of
the Ethics is very complex, to say the least. A good impression of the
complexity we get through reading the excellent, but formidable volume
written by M.Gueroult on how to interpret Part One - one fifth - of the
Ethics. (Spinoza I: Dieu, Paris 1968.) It is difficult for the reader to
'feel at home' with Spinoza at such a level of complication, and the
whole is lost.

A question arises here: When do we write about Spinoza as a professor or
student of academic philosophy and when do we write as philosophers on
our own - however modest in our pretentions of originality or
consistency? The great philosophers we write about in our textbooks of
the history of philosophy inspired each other rather often in a negative
way in the sense of contrasting their views with others. Their freedom,
or licence, of interpretation has been vast in such cases. The way
leading Stoics interpreted Epicureans and vice versa, the way Hegel
interpreted Spinoza, Marx and Kierkegaard interpreted Hegel, Kant
interpreted Hume, Heidegger interpreted Heraclitus - do scarcely bear
pedestrian academic scrutiny. Kant would probably have flunked any
current university examination on Hume. He read very little, and ignored
Treatise of Human Nature. Undergraduates could have corrected him.

I am not defending onesidedness and wildly implausible interpretations,
but I am insisting on the supreme value of working out things under the
inspiration of the text of the great philosophers. Better use of their
achievements cannot be found, and as philosophers, however modest, it is
an obligation to try out tentative answers to the questions we find
urgent and inevitable to answer. This means ultimately to work on
reconstructions rather than detailed interpretations. Gueroult should be
studied carefully, but not as a guru.

Philosophical and religious sources have played and play a role in the
activism of the kind of environmentalism or deep ecology movement which
includes the integration of both academic philosophy and action in a
total view. One of the main sources of this activism has been the
intense despair and

anger at seeing and contemplating the destruction or maltreatment of
living beings, locally or all over the planet. The 'courage of despair'
made Rachel Carson act with vigor on the political scene, and since her
time others have acted in the same spirit all over the world. Love and
understanding requiring the process of identification (Spinoza: unio,
union) have played a significant part, not only narrowly utilitarian
argumentation such as those centering on human health and resources. The
original drive of strong environmental activism has been pain caused by
loss of what we love rather than worries about future human health. The
latter must concern us intensely as humans, but human vision is broader.

VI

In the deep ecology movement, like in the two other great contemporary
movements, the peace movement and the social justice movement, progress
is in part dependent upon active participation of a minority who is able
to use part of their time and energy to serve a great cause. Reliable
news about the ecological crisis is nearly always bad. It is difficult
not to get frustrated and join the many who passively deplore the
destruction that goes on. Among the many sources of inspiration to enter
and continue activism is the teaching of Spinoza.

Activeness - a better term than 'activity' - makes for joy. It expresses
the nature of the active being and the more it expresses the whole, and
the more direct it expresses this unique nature, the greater the joy.
Sorrow is due to passivity, lack of active expression. Therefore, the
intense frustration and sorrow felt by millions in the present situation
on Earth can be overcome, and is being overcome, by jointly entering
into active relations, partaking, each according to his own capacity and
special interest.

Crucial from a systematic point of view is here the definition of
activeness in Part Three of the Ethics:

"I say we act, when something in us or outside us happens, of which we
are adequate cause, that is (according to the foregoing definition) when
something follows in us or outside us from our nature, something that
can only be understood clearly and distinctly from it alone..."

When we are active and free (liber) in this way we are determined in our
action by our (innermost) nature. We do something determined, but
freely. We do it exercising part of the power of God or Nature. And we
cannot escape being joyful, whatever the tragic circumstances. The whole
Part Five centers on how this activeness or freedom can be expanded,
increased, and deepened. No freedom without activism, no activism
without freedom. The highest achievements are always rare, but Spinoza
has an 'optimism' reflected in his teaching about human nature: it
provides a way to joy and freedom.

In the expression Deus sive Natura - nature written with capital N - the
connotation of the two words is not the same, but the denotation is.
Therefore we can substitute 'Nature' for 'God' in Proposition 15, Part
Five:

He who clearly and distinctly understands himself and his affects, loves
Nature, and the more so the more he understands himself (including) his
affects.

The same substitution makes the introductory passage of the proof of
Proposition 20 run as follows:

This love of Nature is the highest good we can strive for in harmony
with the dictate of reason, and is common to all humans, and we wish all
would enjoy it. As a consequence it cannot be polluted through jealousy.

We cannot identify Nature (with a capital N) simply with the (infinite)
set

of particular physical and non-physical things. Such an atomistic view
forgets that natura naturans and natura naturata together make an
integrated whole, tota Natura.

Gestalt thinking and the concept of 'inner relations' are useful in
making precise the interconnectedness of parts and whole. But we cannot
go into this here.

Let us substitute 'God or Nature' for 'God' in Part Five, the Proof of
Proposition 17:

The highest virtue (virtus) of the mind is to understand God or Nature,
or to understand beings in the third way.

The 'or' (sive) internally connects understanding God with understanding
things. For validity Spinoza refers to the just-quoted Proposition 25.
If we focus on God rather than on Nature, the lofty status of
understanding particulars seems to reveal an inconsistency. But why
should we?

According to the Ethics the highest good that the third way of cognition
(amor intellectualis) can lead us to is the understanding of particular
things in the light of God or Nature. In Section 13 of Spinoza's work on
the Understanding, he identifies the highest good with the understanding
of the unity of mind with total Nature (cum tota Natura). The difference
in

formulation is instructive. The latter refers to 'nature', not to 'God',
but achieves the same as the first through the terms 'unity' and
'total'. The adjective totus is perhaps better rendered by 'totality'
than by 'whole', if we wish to stress that the third way of
understanding is that of seeing single paricular things from the
perspective of the whole. If we wish to stress the unity of the mind
with a whole which has an aspect of undivisibility and changelessness,
then 'whole' may be a better translation than 'totality'.

According to the interpretation of Spinoza's system suggested in the
foregoing pages it is perhaps beyond the scope of reason or language to
describe exactly what the relation is between God, perfection, Nature
and individual things, e.g. living beings. But the interpretation
clearly has affinities with an attitude towards nature found among a
significant subgroup of researchers, poets and people with no special
status. Here I am concerned with ecosophy, a total view in part inspired
by what we learn in the ecological crisis.

The philosophical aim of the deep ecology movement, as I see it, may be
formulated in a way not different from that of Spinoza when he speaks
about God or Nature and the role of particulars. Quite central to both
is Spinoza's pronouncement, just referred to:

"This is the goal I seek, namely to acquire such a nature (i.e. a nature
which involves the understanding of the unity of the mind with total
Nature) and to strive that many with me acquire it ... To do this it is
necessary to understand so much of nature as is sufficient to acquire
such a nature; and then to form a kind of community that is required in
order that as many as

possible in the most easy way can safely reach it." (Tractatus de
intellectus emendatione, Section 14).

Nature as conceived by many ecologists and expressed philosohically by
James Lovelock and others, is not the passive, dead, value-neutral
nature of mechanistic science, but is akin to the active, 'perfect' tota
Natura of Spinoza. It is all-inclusive, creative (as natura naturans),
infinitely diverse,

and is alive in the broad sense of Spinozistic panpsychism. It manifests
abstract structure, namely the laws of nature, simulated by such models
as Einstein's field equations.

Because 'all things hang together', we cannot predict the long-range
effects of our particular actions and policies. This is in harmony with
Spinoza's warning that we should not think man capable of ever fully
understanding the 'common order of nature'.

Nature (with a capital N) is intuitively conceived as perfect in a sense
that Spinoza and ecologists hold more or less in common. It is not a
narrowly moral, utilitarian or aesthetic perfection. Nature is perfect
'in itself' and not in so far as it serves specifically human needs. Nor
is it moral or immoral. It is amoral.

'Perfection' in Spinoza means completeness and realness of some sort
when applied in general, and not only to specifically human
achievements. This concept of completeness is related to a certain
concept of a mature ecosystem. Completeness here suggests diversity,
self-reliance, dynamic equilibrium. I mention this only as an example of
how one may, if one has a special liking or

respect for Spinoza, enjoy even remote relatedness of conceptions.

VII

What about the suffering in nature? There is no reason to deny or
underestimate it. Neither should it be overestimated. Lackner has
published an important book concerning that.[6] Neither is there reason
to refrain from intervention in nature to help suffering animals. As
humans we have obligations, primarily towards suffering humans, but also
towards non-human beings. There are of course inevitable clashes of
norms in this area, but general guidelines are fairly clear.[7]

The Ethics does not go into politics, but does express views on
community. The absence of any treatment of how love of Nature can have
political impact does not justify the assumption that Spinoza
underestimates the obstacles. From his political philosophy we may infer
that his views are grim. What he experienced caused him frustration and
even desperation. But it did not affect his views on the 'way to
freedom'.

One of my aims today has been to clarify the strangely intimate
relations of many terms in Spinoza's Ethics. Let me repeat how a whole
bunch of terms are related. Joy is said to be a "transition (transitio)
from smaller to greater

perfection" (Definition 2 of the affects, Part Three). What can joy have
to do with perfection? Very little if one does not realize the special
relation of the term perficere in Spinoza to a sort of completeness
(wholeness) which has meaning in itself. Even then the definition of joy
seems queer. One has to

drag in not only the term activeness, agere, activeness, as understood
in definition 2 of Part Three, but also freedom, necessity, determinism.
These terms are intimately connected with the above. To act in the sense
of expressing one's own nature, is to act freely, determined by one's
own nature and not arbitrarily and by chance.

An act causes something adequately, and every being causes something
this way. That is, every being shares in the creativity of God or
Nature, every being is not wholly in something other (in alio) in the
terminology of Spinoza. Power is power to act, that is, cause
adequately, and an increase cannot but increase the level of virtue.
(Here Spinoza fundamentally differs from Hobbes.)

To be, and therefore act, in one self (in suo esse) is one of the basic
notions in the Ethics and it has a clear connection with
self-perseveration.

The relation of the ecosophically important notions of selfrealization
to the Spinozist perseverare justifies a closer inspection of
terminology and the significantly different concepts at hand.

The principle of self-preservation as exemplified and as defined by
philosophers and bilogists since the Stoics has a main component of
defense against external threats. But it also covers behavior and
structure adopted to maintaining inner equilibrium under changing
environmental conditions. Conceived in this way the principle has
acquired renewed importance through the deep ecology movement.

In Spinoza's Ethics the term is not defined in this way, but from the
context we can infer what he considers to be an increase or decrease in
the level of self-perseveration.

The term used by Spinoza in the third part of the Ethics is, as stated

above, perseverare. In translation it should rather be rendered by
'persevere' or 'persist' than by 'preserve'.[8] The dictionary meaning
of the English term, Wyld formulates as follows:

To persist doggedly and with determination, diligence and patience, with
the object a) of completing a task; b) of overcoming difficulty or
opposition; c) of attaining a purpose, securing an aim etc.

The classic Latin term perseverare C.T.Lewis translates with "to abide,
adhere strictly, continue steadfastly, persist, persevere". Example:
navis perseveravit, "the ship kept on its course".

The term perseverare in the Ethics must of course be conceived more
abstract and general, but I think the English term furnish an adequate
basis. The dynamic character is, for instance, better served than by
"preservation" or by "conservation". (Praeservare is not used by
Spinoza, but conservare is - as a synonym for perseverare).

Human power to act is proportional to the extent to which we are the

adequate cause of something, which again, according to the definition of
adequate causation, is proportional to the extent to which what is done
follows from our nature or essence alone, and not from any pressure upon
us. When we act in the sense introduced, we persevere in our being or
essence. A thing that perseveres in its being "in so far as it is in
itself" perseveres in its essence.

"'To persevere one's being' is the same as 'to persevere in one's
essence' and not to persevere in someone else's essence", says Spinoza.
Altruism in the sense of caring for others or doing things for the sake
of others does not imply shedding one's essence and jumping into the
essence of something else. A being is the more free the more it acts
out, or is caused by, it own nature alone. It is a question of
maintaining identity, not of strengthening ego or egocentricity.

The term perseverare acquires its function from its position within a
structure that is unique to Spinoza's system and different from the
function of related terms in other philosophers. But it would lead us
astray if we adopted 'self-perseverance' as a fundamental term of
Spinoza's system. No single term is fundamental in his system. There are
at least a dozen, which are basic. Therefore we cannot overemphasize the
importance of keeping their internal relations in mind.If not, the
system falls apart.

Taken in its crudest form - the endeavor to continue somehow to survive,
is of little systematic interest. And taken to imply a resistance to
change - a striving to keep on just as one always has done, it is
clearly un-Spinozistic. The dynamic, interactionist view of the self
makes it inevitable to interpret the principles as a striving for
self-causingness, activeness, power. We might connect it more
specifically with the striving for perfection, for whole-ness,
completeness, self-madeness, as suggested by the special use of the term
in the Ethics.The use of conatus in Proposition 28, Part Five, is
instructive: "The conatus or desire to understand things in the third
way of cognition...". The proof of Proposition 20 in Part Four offers an
excellent occurrence of grading conatus, perseverance, conservation,
power and virtue:

"Virtue is the very power of man, and is defined by solely the essence
of man, that is, which is defined through solely the striving by which
man strives to persevee in his being. Therefore, the more each strives
to conserve his being, and is able to do so, the more he is endowed with
virtue. And as a consequence, to the extent a man neglects to conserve
his own being, he is wanting in power."

In the ecosophy I feel at home with, a fundamental norm can be
formulated, on a vague, 'point-of-departure-level', as
'Self-realization!'. The nearest term in the terminology of the Ethics
is 'perseverare in suo esse', to persevere in one's self, that is, to
act expressing one's nature, realizing potentials. The self can be said
to comprise what one identifies with. The identification may be
superficial or deep, the scope of identification narrow or broad. The
person who is 'all round' mature cannot avoid identifying himself with
every living being - 'seeing himself or herself in every being'.

IX

People motivated by the positive (active) affects and not by the
negative

(passive) ones have the same ultimate aim, partaking in the same highest
virtue of the mind (Part Five, Proposition 25, Proof), and are therefore
capable of joining together in peaceful communities.

The less the nature of people is similar, the less easy it is to live
together,

and the less they are useful to each other. This, I think, can be
inferred from what he says about the nature of different living beings.
From such a point of view he talks about animals which have feelings, he
says, but have such a very different nature from us that they cannot be
our friends and members of our communities. He does not say that because
they are inferior or lower they cannot be our friends.

Part of what Spinoza says in this connection is different from what
supporters of the deep ecology movement tend to say. What I refer to is
the expression of Spinoza when he says that animals have the same right
in relation to humans as humans have in relation to animals, but that
humans have more right than animals. Many supporters of the deep ecology
movement say that animals have as much right as humans. There is an
equality of right.

I tend to disagree with any quantification here. Animals and humans may
be said to have at least one kind of right in common, namely the right
to live and blossom. The concept I prefer if I use the term 'right' in
this connection is such that it does not warrant quantification. Spinoza
does not use the term 'right' in such a way and he cannot avoid
quantification.

There is among Spinoza's terms none that corresponds to the important
term '(process of) identification', by which humans attribute intrinsic
or inherent value to every human being and also to large sections, or
all, non-human beings. But the structure of his system is such that all
beings can be said to partake in the power of God. Because of the
equivalences joining 'power' with other terms, the structure is
compatible with the intrinsic value and the self-realization views. In
this way the transition from the basic ("first level") announcements of
Spinoza to the ("second level") 8 points of my proposed survey of the
deep ecology movement is made smooth.

Supporters of the deep ecology movement have been increasingly involved
in social and political conflicts. Since the controversies on
pesticides, the pervasive influence of social and political obstacles
have made supporters more pessimistic about the near future. The
question must here be raised: Can something be learned from 17th Century
Spinoza about the 20th Century frustrating political situation? Not very
much, I think.

The understanding of Spinoza's political opinion is clearly dependent
upon what he says in the Ethics and other works, and upon the special
social and political conditions in the Netherlands at that time. I shall
here limit myself strictly to some remarks on the relations between the
Ethics and his social

philosphy in so far as they are fairly independent of the special
conditions in his time. They concern primarily some of the central terms
mentioned in the foregoing.

Adequate ideas is only avialable through the second and third kinds of

cognition, the rational and the intuitive. These two kinds do not get
into conflict, but the rational teaches us only what is required in our
quest to

understand in the third way, that is, ultimately what is necessary
individually, socially, and politically, to reach a peaceful community
where all can, among other things, enjoy the loving understanding of God
or Nature.

Led by reason we understand, according Spinoza, that friends are the
most useful to reach the ultimate goals in life. In cirlces of close
friends led by reason, no serious conflicts arise: they are led by the
active affects and not by the passive, like hate and jealousy. People
led by reason desire that everyone get to understand this. They look
foreward to the creation of peaceful and tolerant communities.

So much about a Utopia that is thought to be inevitably desired by
mature human being!

But the social situation shows how far from reaching the Utopia we are:

most people are, according to Spinoza, led by passive rather than active

effects, and they choose leaders who seem to help them reach goals
derived from these passive affects.[9]

How can this be changed? Spinoza grew increasingly pessimistic. He

did not have the same opinions during the long time he was working on
the manuscript of the Ethics. The last time was in 1674, two years after
the politically catastrophic year of the assassination of Jan de Witt.
Spinoza was poltically active and the events of 1672 may have changed
some of his ideas - he was led towards general pessimism about the
future. But it did not influence the main structure of the Ethics, the
Propositions and their proofs. It is more likely that it affected some
of the notes (scholiae) put in between the Propositions.

It is the main body of the Ethics which had, has, and will in the future
inspire those who, on the basis of their fundamental beliefs and
attitudes, try to contribute, however modestly, to the solutions of the
ecological crisis.

X

I could go on like this for a long time to suggest how Spinoza's may be
a

source of inspiration. But I will end with this concluding remark:
Spinoza had a vision, a small set of intimately connected deep
intuitions. He clearly saw that to convey the content of his vision, and
of all main views depending on it, it would not be possible to use a
small number of words. The argumentation in the Ethics uses many words
and many levels of the premiss/conclusion relation. The intimacy of the
relation between the key terms enables the careful reader to get a
feeling of the basic intuitions he tried to elicit in us.

[1]     Naess, "Limited Definiteness of 'God' in Spinoza's System.
Answer to Heine Siebrand", Neue Zeitschrift für systematische Theologie
und Religionsphilosophie, 28, 1986, pp.275-283.

[2]     One may speak of the finite God (Deus modificatus) of Spinoza as
well as about the infinite: Naess, "Apinoza's Finite God", Revue
internationale de Philosophie, Vol.35, 1981, pp.120-126. Researchers
mostly take the first part of the Ethics more seriously than the last -
the account of human freedom and power as genuine part of God's. Doing
this they seem not to be aware of the limitation of mere formal logical
priority.

[3]     The distinction between content and abstract structure is worked
out in Naess, "The World of Concrete Contents", Inquiry, 28, 1985,
pp.417-428.

[4]     See for instance the Nichomachian Ethics 1174b and Metaphysics
980a. Wolfson traces the history of the relevant ideas. After offering
the above references he quotes Crescas, one of the central personalities
within Spinoza's traditions: "the nobler the comprehension of things is,
the greater is the agreeableness and joy which accompany the
comprehension." (Wolfson, op.cit., II pp.302-303). It is important that
Crescas uses the term 'things', not 'God'. But "accompany" unfortunately
suggests an external relation.

[5]     The fundamental interrelatioship between the cognitive and
conative is systematized in A.Naess and J.Wetlesen, Conation and
Cognition in Spinoza's Theory of Affects. A Reconstruction. Institute of
Philosophy, University of Oslo, 1967.

[6]     Lackner,Stephan, Peaceable Nature, San Francisco,: Harper & Row,
1984.

[7]     A little more on intervention to decrease suffering: A.Naess,
"Should we try to relieve clear cases of extreme suffering in nature?"
in Pan Ecology, Vol.6, Number 1, Winter 1991.

[8]     I have commented on perseverare and its relation to Hobbes in
"Environmental Ethics and Spinoza's Ethics...", Inquiry, 23, 1980,
pp.313-325. In what follows, some formulations are borrowed from that
article .

In the fourth part of the Ethics, the term conservare is often used as a
synonym for perseverare. I think that the former is too passive in its
fringe connotations. I shall acordingly write as if perseverare was used
consistently by Spinoza.

[9]     Some central places in the Ethics showing the way from Spinoza's
Ethics to his political writings:Concerning reason (ratio): Part Two,
Proposition 40, Scholium 2. From the terminology there follows
Proposition 35 of Part Four: "In so far men live under the guidance of
reason, to that extent only do they always agree in nature". (This is
queer if one does not take into account Spinoza's somewhat special use
of the term ratio. Concerning freedom, reason, mutual aid, peace, and
friendship:"Only free men are truly advantageious (invicem utilissimi)
to one another and united by a maximally close bond of friendship."
(Part Four, Proposition 71, Proof.) Here the term 'freedom' must be
interpreted in accordance with what is said about adequate causation and
activeness (Part Three, Definition 2), and the resulting close relation
between the terms 'freedom' and 'reason': "A free human being, that is,
a man who lives under the guidance only of reason,..." (Part Four,
Demonstration of Proposition 67.)

From these places it is fairly clear that a Spinozistic social Utopia is
one which is conceived to furnish the best conditions for freedom for
everybody - 'freedom' being interpreted in his way. But what kind of
politics is the best? The question is open. I don't think Spinoza's
political work can offer much here.
